                                        EFFEKT: Efficient Federated Knowledge Transfer
                                        to Foundation Models

                                        Matteo Caligiuri
                                        Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering                                    caligiuri.m@northeastern.edu
                                        Northeastern University, Boston (MA), United States
                                        Department of Information Engineering                                              matteo.caligiuri@dei.unipd.it
                                        University of Padua, Padua, Italy

                                        Francesco Barbato                                                                 francesco.barbato@dei.unipd.it
                                        Department of Information Engineering
                                        University of Padua, Padua, Italy

                                        Pietro Zanuttigh                                                                         zanuttigh@dei.unipd.it
                                        Department of Information Engineering
                                        University of Padua, Padua, Italy
arXiv:2608.08138v1 [cs.CV] 8 Aug 2026




                                        Francesco Restuccia                                                                f.restuccia@northeastern.edu
                                        Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
                                        Northeastern University, Boston (MA), United States



                                                                                         Abstract

                                                Recent data protection laws have accelerated the adoption of Federated Learning (FL)
                                                for privacy-preserving decentralized training. Nevertheless, increasing model sizes impose
                                                substantial computational demands on client devices, limiting FL applicability in resource-
                                                constrained settings. We introduce a novel multi-domain federated learning framework in
                                                which lightweight client-side proxy models collaborate with a server-side Foundation Model
                                                (FM) to learn new concepts without sharing private data. Our approach, EFFEKT, enables
                                                efficient server-side training of domain-specific LoRA adapters while preserving feature-space
                                                alignment between the FM and proxy extractors via novel bi-directional cross-distillation
                                                strategies. Experiments on multiple real-world datasets and deployments on low-power edge
                                                devices demonstrate improvements over state-of-the-art baselines in most considered domains
                                                while maintaining lightweight computation at the client side.


                                        1    Introduction

                                        Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a successful paradigm in machine learning, addressing the critical
                                        need for privacy-aware distributed training of models. This approach typically involves local optimization on
                                        client devices coupled with server-side aggregation, dissemination, and control (Shenaj et al., 2023b). The
                                        key advantage of FL lies in its ability to train models using locally available data on client devices, thereby
                                        preserving privacy by eliminating the need to transmit sensitive information to a central server. While FL has
                                        proven effective for training lightweight models on mobile devices, the recent advent of high-performing yet
                                        extremely complex transformer-based foundation models presents a significant challenge. These sophisticated
                                        models, due to their sheer size and computational requirements, are often too complex for deployment and
                                        training on client devices, potentially limiting the applicability of traditional FL approaches.
                                        To illustrate the practical implications of this challenge, consider a scenario where a technology company aims
                                        to offer a personalized remote image recognition service exploiting a powerful foundation model at server side.
                                        The local implementations of this service could be tailored to specific domains (e.g., plant or insect species
                                        recognition, or vehicle model identification) and adapted to individual user data (that could have strong


                                                                                              1
   FEDERATED OPTIMIZATION           AGGREGATION                             SERVER INFERENCE
                                                           DOMAIN                    FINE-GRAINED
             UPLOAD                                        CLASSIFICATION            CLASSIFICATION




                                      C2S DISTILL.
                FL
               ROUND




            DOWNLOAD                                                                   LORA SELECTION
                                  JOINT ALIGNMENT




Figure 1: EFFEKT is a heterogeneous federated learning pipeline that allows bidirectional, multidomain
optimization of a server-side foundation model and small client-side proxy models thanks to our Clients-to-
Server (C2S) distillation and Joint Alignment (JA) objectives.



privacy constraints), while the central server maintains a more comprehensive, multi-domain model. In this
context, the ability to improve the global model using local, domain-specific data in a privacy-preserving
manner becomes crucial. However, the complexity of state-of-the-art vision models often precludes their
direct deployment on user devices, necessitating novel federated learning techniques.
A viable solution for this issue is to deploy a simple CNN model on client devices, with its feature space
aligned to that of a larger, more complex model. This idea is exploited by FedPromo (Caligiuri et al., 2025),
where the lightweight network served as a proxy for the local training of a task-specific decoder, which was
then reattached to the main model. While this approach allows tackling the computational complexity issues,
from a performance viewpoint, it is still hampered by the issues of the simple averaging of network weights
used at the server side, especially when client models become too misaligned (McMahan et al., 2017).
In this paper, we introduce a novel server-side aggregation approach that allows for better performance by
replacing standard weight averaging with a distillation-based scheme. Our method builds upon the concept
of using a simple network with features aligned to the complex one. However, at each federated round, we
first efficiently distill the information learned by the clients into the foundation model, leveraging Low-Rank
Approximation (LoRA). The updated foundation model is then utilized to perform joint re-alignment between
the server and proxy models before initiating the new federated round. Note that this requires access to the
latents and logits of the foundation model, which may not be available in API-based close-weight settings.
Furthermore, access to task-specific pretraining domains remains an important aspect of our approach, but,
as discussed in Section A.5, the similarity requirement between pretraining and client data is not so stringent.
Crucially, our new approach yields substantial improvements in server-side accuracy, with an average increase
over the state-of-the-art of 3.9% for top-1 accuracy and 2.7% for top-5 accuracy across 5 fine-grained
domains. To further validate our setup and its real-world applicability, we deploy the architecture on
compute-constrained devices. We measure final accuracy, energy consumption, and bandwidth usage in these
deployments. Our results demonstrate that the simulated experiments closely mirror real-world deployments,
exhibiting limited energy consumption and network usage, thus enabling deployment on personal devices.
This advancement not only enhances the performance of federated learning systems but also expands their
potential applications. In the context of our earlier example, it allows for more effective learning of new,
previously unknown classes at the server level without direct access to client data. This capability is
particularly valuable in scenarios where the central model must evolve to recognize novel categories (e.g.,
rare animal species or new vehicle models) based solely on distributed learning from user devices, all while
maintaining strict privacy standards. Good privacy standards are guaranteed theoretically by the limited
number of shared parameters and can be further improved at the price of a limited performance loss by
adding the Local Differential Privacy technique (see Sec. A.4).
By bridging the gap between complex foundation models and resource-constrained edge devices, our approach
paves the way for more inclusive and privacy-preserving AI applications, enabling a wider range of devices to
participate in and benefit from advanced machine learning models.


                                                       2
2   Related Works

Federated Learning (FL) was introduced by McMahan et al. (2017), which proposed a simple server-side
aggregation approach based on weight averaging. The approach, called FedAvg, was effective in simple
scenarios but struggled when tackling strongly non-IID data distributions. The technique has been extended
in many different directions (Yuan et al., 2024; Shenaj et al., 2023b). For example, FedProx Li et al. (2020)
added a proximal term to the local objectives to limit the impact of local updates to reduce clients’ drift.
Similarly, SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020) tackles client drift through direct estimation and subsequent
correction. MOON (Li et al., 2021) exploited model-based contrastive learning to improve client training.
Foundation Models (FMs) enabled significant improvements in several fields, from Natural Language
Processing (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)) to Computer Vision. The CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) approach
represents a key advancement in Vision-Language Models (VLMs); by using contrastive learning, it enables
the alignment of visual and text representations. Another cornerstone work is DINO (Caron et al., 2021),
which learns the semantics of objects without supervision by utilizing self-distillation. FMs have also been
used as oracle feature extractors for pretraining of other network models (Ostapenko et al., 2022).
Pretraining in FL: In the standard FL settings (McMahan et al., 2017), optimization begins with randomly
initialized model weights; however, this can affect efficiency and performance, particularly in cases of high
heterogeneity. To tackle this issue, server-side pretraining strategies have been employed to stabilize subsequent
federated training, enabling longer local training and reducing communication costs (Shenaj et al., 2023b;
Nguyen et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023). Pretraining on synthetically generated data has also been utilized to
establish a stable starting point for challenging vision applications (Shenaj et al., 2023a).
Knowledge Distillation (KD): Knowledge Distillation is a widely used strategy that facilitates the transfer
of knowledge across different learning models (Hinton, 2015). It has recently been exploited in FL, both in a
Model-agnostic way (Jeong et al., 2018; Li & Wang, 2019; Hongyan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2024) to improve
FL across various architectures and in a data-agnostic way (Zhu et al., 2021; Sattler et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2022; Yao et al., 2023) to enhance performance in non-IID settings. Inspired by these works, our approach
uses KD during pretraining to align the lightweight model with the server model.
Federated Training of FMs has recently emerged as a novel venue of research (Ren et al., 2025),
focusing on aggregation techniques suitable for large-scale models and on improving both computational and
communication efficiency. Some works concentrate on the federated training of specific FMs: a federated
training strategy for CLIP (Li et al., 2021) is proposed in Lu et al. (2023); the work of Harasic et al. (2024)
analyzes the performance of DINO (Oquab et al., 2023) in federated settings; a pretrained SAM (Kirillov
et al., 2023) is fine-tuned on the clients in Liu et al. (2024). However, training these models is expensive; thus,
other approaches tackle FM optimization by training LoRA adapters in a federated manner instead of the
full models (Yi et al., 2023; Babakniya et al., 2023). Note that these methods train the adapter on the client
and average the weights (e.g., via FedAvg) on the server. Finally, Caligiuri et al. (2025) exploits a lightweight
client architecture whose latent space aligns with that of a large model at the server, allowing federated
training without bringing the FM to the clients. Iterating on these works, our approach trains a FM in a
scalable, modular, and privacy-preserving manner, using FL on remote devices and KD at server side.


3   Problem Setting

In this section, we briefly recap the Cross-Architecture Federated Knowledge Transfer (CA-FKT)
task (Caligiuri et al., 2025) and the mathematical notation.
Following traditional federated learning, we assume the presence of a server and a set of nk clients K = {kj }nj=1
                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                   ,
which collaborate in a distributed optimization setup. Training is performed over nr communication rounds.
In each round, the server selects a different set of na active clients Ka . Each client kj ∈ Ka trains its model
Mkj = Hkj ◦ E for ne local epochs using its private dataset Dkj before sending the updated weights to the
server for aggregation (note that only Hkj is trained). Then, the server samples a new client set Ka and
sends to the clients the aggregated model as initialization for the next distributed optimization round. The
setup introduces key differences from the standard approach.


                                                         3
A) PRETRAINING                                              B) CLIENT kj
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD
                                                                  forward                 UPLOAD


                                                                prediction
                                                                ground truth
                                 L2 NORM                                                           DOWNLOAD




                                 L2 NORM




C) CLIENTS-TO-SERVER DISTILLATION                           D) JOINT ALIGNMENT


                                  LORA                                         LORA




                  1
    DOWNLOAD




                  2




                  J



                                                                                      UPLOAD



Figure 2: The EFFEKT architecture and cross-distillation strategies. a) pretraining pipeline; b) local update
of client kj . c) Clients-to-Server distillation (C2S), where the active clients’ proxy models are used to update
the correct domain-LoRA on the server; d) Joint Alignment (JA) distillation, utilizing the updated server
model as initialization for the next round’s proxy models.


Firstly, it supports domain-asynchronous training; therefore, the clients are divided into ni non-overlapping
groups Kdi based on their domain index i ∈ I = {1, . . . , ni }. Since different domains require distinct
sets of model parameters, for clarity of notation, we will add the domain index to the general notation
introduced above for the rest of the document, e.g., client kj ’s model Mkj becomes Mkdji = Hkdji ◦ E di , where
Hkdji : Rnf 7→ Y di = {1, . . . , ncdi } and E di : Rh×w×3 7→ Rnf are the domain i head and encoder, respectively.
Secondly, we assume that the server and client model architectures are distinct; more specifically, the server
encoder Ô is assumed to be much larger and better-performing than the small, efficient client encoders E di .
Crucially, to allow cross-distillation, the features produced by the two models must have the same dimensions,
allowing us to attach the same head H di to both the server and client encoders. Refer to Sec. 4 for more
details. While Ô is assumed to work well across all domains, to improve performance, we introduce a set of
LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) adapters {Ldi }i∈I . For ease of notation, we define Odi as the server model adapted
with LoRA Ldi . Formally, given an input RGB image X ∈ X ⊂ Rh×w×3 with a resolution of w × h pixels,
the server and client encoders extract features FO = Odi (X) and FE = E di (X), where FO , FE ∈ Rnf .
In our setup, during training, the domain-specific clients notify the server of the correct domain index i; while
during inference, the domain of a sample X can be inferred using a domain discriminator D : Rh×w×3 7→ I
trained on a set of public, task-specific, pretraining datasets {Dpdi }i∈I with different, coarser, class labels.


4              Proposed Method

In order to tackle the CA-FKT task, we implement our EFFEKT federated framework (summarized in
Fig. 2) on top of an encoder-decoder classification network, where the architectures of the server and client
encoders differ while maintaining a common latent space. This choice permits the deployment of larger
and higher-performing models on the server while maintaining a low computational profile on the clients.


                                                        4
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for EFFEKT ServerRound.
Require: Number of rounds nr and active clients na , domain index i, server encoder (with LoRA) Odi , peak
    learning rate lrmax , cosine annealing learning rate scheduler, pretraining head Hpdi
                                                                     d      d
 1: Select the domain clients’ group Kdi , and the initial model Mk i = Hk i ◦ E di
 2: for r ← 1 . . . nr do
 3:    Compute the active clients set Kadi by randomly sampling na clients from Kdi // Different each round
 4:    Send to the active clients j ∈ Kadi the model Mkdi
 5:    Compute current round learning rate from the scheduler lr ← CosineScheduler(lrmax , r, nr )
 6:    for kj ∈ Kadi do                                                            // Performed in Parallel
 7:     Receive Hkdji ← ClientRound Hkdi , lr from kj
 8:   end for                              
 9:   Ldi ← C2S Ldi , E di , {Hkdji }k ∈Kdi                                                      // Train LoRAs
                                      j
                                      a
10:   Hkdi ← FedAvg {Hkdji }k ∈Kdi                                                           // Aggregate heads
                                j   a

11:   Mkdi ← Hkdi ◦ Edi
                                                                            // Update model with new head
12:     Mkdi , Ldi , Hpdi ← JA Mkdi , Ldi , Hpdi                                                         // Align
13: end for



While, in principle, any couple of feature-aligned architectures could be used, to ensure fair comparison,
we choose the same architectures used in competing works (Caligiuri et al., 2025). More specifically, the
server architecture is a DINOv2 (ViT-L/14-Reg) model (Oquab et al., 2023), while the client model is
a MobilenetV3-small (Howard et al., 2019) with a linear feature translator module. The content of the
two feature spaces is aligned during a pretraining phase that is different for each domain di , and uses an
appropriate public task-specific dataset Dpdi . This results in a specific classification head Hpdi for each of the
domains due to the different class sets; the head can be freely attached to both server and client encoders.

4.1   Federated Training

Our implementation of the CA-FKT task aims to closely mimic a real-world deployment, which incurs several
issues during distributed optimization, chief among them client divergence due to the strongly non-IID class
distribution (Hsu et al., 2019). Therefore, strong regularization objectives and effective FL techniques are
necessary to control the evolution of training. As such, we decided to employ a selective weight optimization
strategy for the distributed optimization framework, i.e., the ICP approach (Caligiuri et al., 2025). More
details are in Alg. A.2 of the Appendix. Simply using this strategy, however, leads to subpar performance at
the server side; therefore, we propose a novel cross-distillation federated aggregation technique to update
the server model and improve its accuracy on unseen domains without impacting its generalizability using
domain-specific LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022). More specifically, during each optimization round, each
active client kj receives the updated model from the server and trains only the head Hkdji using its private
local dataset Dkdji , thus preserving latent space alignment between different clients. After local optimization,
the updated heads are sent to the server for aggregation and FM tuning. As detailed in Alg. 1, this step is
split into two complementary operations: Clients-to-Server (C2S) and Joint Alignment (JA) distillation.
Clients-to-Server (C2S) Distillation
As the name implies, the first step of our aggregation pipeline involves updating the server-side FM by
leveraging the knowledge acquired by the clients during the current round. Note that, to reduce computational
and storage costs, the update is applied only to a small set of LoRA parameters. This choice is a good tradeoff
between accuracy and complexity, as shown by the experiments in Tab. 7Pof the ablation. The knowledge
is updated using a logit-level knowledge distillation loss LL  KD (P, T) = −    y∈Y P[y] log T[y], where P is a
vector of predicted class-probabilities and T is the reference distribution. Note that this is the reverse of the
standard orientation, leading to several benefits in our setup. More specifically, this loss can be decomposed
into KL(P ||T ) + H(P ), that is, the mode-covering (Hinton, 2015) version of Kullback-Leibler divergence
(useful under unreliable supervision) and prediction entropy, which is often used as a loss in unsupervised


                                                        5
domain adaptation (Springenberg, 2015). This objective is computed on the output probability of each
received (frozen) client head and is summed to compute the final loss:
                                         X                                
                                                      di           di
                                LC2S =       LLKD   Hkj  (F O ), Hkj  (FE )  .                    (1)
                                         kj ∈Ka

Note that, since the training is performed by the server that does not have access to private client data, the
samples used for distillation are extracted from the task-specific pretraining dataset Dpdi . A more detailed
breakdown of this procedure is reported in Alg. A.3 of the Appendix.
Joint Alignment (JA) Distillation
In general, the updates applied to the server model in the previous step may lead to misalignment between
the feature spaces of the FM and of the client-side proxies. Therefore, an additional realignment procedure is
necessary to restore feature matching and improve the accuracy of the aggregated client model. Note that, in
the previous step, the trained client heads were kept separate to preserve all available client knowledge. In
contrast, here we begin by computing a single domain client head Hkdi by aggregating the trained client heads
Hkdji , kj ∈ Kadi using the FedAvg strategy (McMahan et al., 2017) to serve as the distillation target. This is
necessary because a unique model must be sent to all active clients to initialize the subsequent federated
round. As before, to preserve the privacy of client data, this realignment is performed by the server using
the task-specific pretraining data Dpdi . The key differences lie in the optimization targets, which include
both classification accuracy and alignment objectives. We train the task-specific head Hpdi , the full client
model Mkdi (including the encoder), and the LoRA Ldi . The training loss has two major focuses. The first
being the classification accuracy of both the adapted FM and the client encoder using standard cross-entropy
objectives. The second is the preservation of feature compatibility, which is achieved by encouraging server
and client latent representations to be similar using the LF
                                                           KD loss together with bidirectional logits alignment
LLKD . The overall loss function for this step can be written as:

                  LJA = LCE Hpdi (FO ), y + LCE Hpdi (FE ), y + LF                 F
                                                            
                                                                  KD (FE , FO ) + LKD (FO , FE )
                                 
                                     di       di
                                                                 
                                                                      di        di
                                                                                                           (2)
                      + λL     L                          L    L
                          KD LKD Hk (FO ), Hk (FE ) + λKD LKD Hk (FE ), Hk (FO )            ,

where LCE denotes the standard categorical cross-entropy loss (applied to Hpdi to match the class-set of
the only domain dataset available at server-side, Dpdi ), λL                              F
                                                           KD is a hyperparameter, and LKD is the sum of
the L1, L2 and cosine distances (Barbato et al., 2024). The first two objectives are necessary to preserve
the discriminative capability of the server and proxy encoders, respectively; the next two allow for shared
application of the head; the last two update the aggregated head to ensure compatibility with the new latent
space. The pseudocode is provided in Alg. A.4 of the Appendix.
Discussion on Convergence
As in other benchmark federated learning works such as FedAvg, MOON, FedHEAL, or FedPromo, we provide
no formal convergence proof beyond empirical evidence, which shows that accuracy rises monotonically with
narrowing confidence intervals, indicating a stable fixed point rather than oscillation (Figures A.5, A.6).
Note that this behavior is consistent across architectures, configurations, and datasets (Tables A.1–A.4,
Figures A.3–A.8). Nevertheless, to supplement the numerical results, we discuss how the C2S/JA pair can be
regarded as a proximal alternating minimization strategy, whose convergence behavior is well-known. On
the clients, the updates are anchored to the (frozen) encoder features, as only the classifier is trained; C2S
then updates just 1.57M LoRA parameters (< 1% of the FM), thereby bounding server-side drift; and JA
realigns the aggregated client model with the updated FM on public data, undoing any drift that C2S may
have introduced. This yields a proximal alternating minimization in which the frozen encoder and LoRA
confine each step to a low-dimensional subspace, and JA softly projects back onto the manifold of compatible
feature spaces, while the learning rate decaying to 0 shrinks late updates and guards against divergence.

4.2   Multi-Domain Setup

In our setup, each client knows its domain index and can communicate it to the server during training
(this does not break privacy, as the domain categorization is not sensitive), thereby avoiding inter-domain


                                                      6
Figure 3: Real devices’ setup: 3 Raspberry Pi 4, 3 Raspberry Pi 5, 5 Jetson Nano, and 1 Jetson Orin-Nano.


confusion during aggregation. Note that in a realistic scenario, federated learning is often performed in a
domain-asynchronous manner, meaning that the server must be able to activate the correct LoRA adapter
and model head to optimize based on the received client updates. Our approach employs LoRAs and distinct
heads instead of directly updating the server model, which guarantees the possibility of incrementally learning
new domains without impacting the performance of previously learned models or compatibility with the
compute-constrained proxy encoders.
Multi-Domain Inference
Whenever the server needs to run inference on a given sample, two scenarios are possible: either the prompt
(from a client) includes the expected domain, or the domain information is missing. In the former case, since
the client provided the necessary domain index, the server can directly activate the correct LoRA adapter
and head before executing the model. In the latter case, the server must estimate the correct domain before
proceeding. To tackle this issue, we introduce a server-side classifier that identifies the domain of the query.
Domain Discriminator
Since the domain discriminator may be utilized for each sample during server-side inference, we aimed to
minimize its computational impact without compromising accuracy. Moreover, to avoid retraining the model
every time a domain is added, we adopted a few-shot-based approach, i.e., prototypical classification. More
specifically, the domain classifier is implemented as a frozen encoder-only MobileNetV3-small (Howard et al.,
2019) architecture pretrained on ImageNet-1k (Deng et al., 2009), which extracts a latent representation of
each given query sample. At inference time, the extracted features are compared to a set of internally stored
prototypes (one for each domain) using the L2-distance metric. The domain index i corresponding to the
closest prototype is selected as output. The domain prototypes are computed during the pretraining step of
the domain-specific client encoders using the task-specific pretraining datasets Dpdi . Despite the negligible
computational cost, this simple classifier achieves remarkable domain accuracy, as detailed in Table 3 of the
ablation studies.

5     Implementation Details

We implemented our approach1 using the Flower framework (Beutel et al., 2020) in PyTorch (PyTorch
maintainers and contributors, 2016). Pretraining and simulated federated experiments utilized a single
NVIDIA L40s GPU, running both the server and active clients in parallel. The server-side computational
costs are detailed in Appendix A.6. Real-world experiments employed a server containing a single NVIDIA
A100 GPU, and a cluster of 3 Raspberry Pi 4, 3 Raspberry Pi 5, 5 Jetson Nano and 1 Jetson Orin-Nano, all
having a minimum of 4GB of RAM (the setup is shown in Figure 3). The supplementary material contains a
short video showing the setup and training on real devices.
Lightweight Encoders Pretraining
We pretrain the lightweight encoders on the server for 60 epochs using a batch size of 64. We adopt a
cosine-annealing learning rate scheduler (decaying to lr = 0) with a peak learning rate of lrmax = 0.005.
Optimization is performed using Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) with no weight decay. We follow the
TorchVision benchmark (TorchVision maintainers and contributors, 2016) for MobileNet data augmentation.
    1 Code is available at: https://github.com/LTTM/EFFEKT




                                                             7
As a reference, pretraining requires 40 minutes on an NVIDIA L40s for StanfordCars, while timing on other
datasets scales roughly with size (see the Appendix).
Simulated Federated Experiments
Optimizer, scheduler, batch size, and peak
learning rate are kept the same as in pretrain- Table 1: Federated Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy (↑) on the
ing. The optimization runs for nr = 500 rounds, server after federated aggregation. Best in bold, second-best
with ne = 10 local epochs per client (with- underlined.
out augmentation). We consider a federated
setup with nk = 100 clients, where na = 10                                                  DINOv2
                                                        Dataset D           Method
clients participate at each round. The server-                                           Top-1    Top-5
                                            −5                              FedAvg        14.0     27.4
side distillation learning rate is set to 10 and
  L                                                                     FedAvg + EMA      21.5     42.6
λKD = 0.01. Federated finetuning on Comp-
                                                                            FedProx       13.7     31.2
Cars requires ∼15 hours. The LoRA adapters                                  MOON          13.8     27.4
are applied to each attention layer of the server       CompCars
                                                                           FedHEAL        13.9     27.0
model, targeting Q and V . The rank is set to                             FedPromo        35.8     69.4
16 for a total of 1.57M parameters (∼ 194× less                         EFFEKT (ours)     43.0     75.0
than the full server model and 1.6× less than                             Centralized     43.2     73.6
the client model). See Table 7 for additional                               FedAvg        29.6     50.4
configurations.                                                         FedAvg + EMA      49.1     83.1
                                                                                FedProx          8.2     42.4
On-Device Federated Experiments                                                 MOON            29.7     50.5
                                                         UECFOOD256
The training configuration is analogous to that                                FedHEAL          29.5     50.2
used in the simulated experiments, the key                                    FedPromo          58.7     88.7
difference being that no GPU acceleration is                                EFFEKT (ours)       62.1     88.8
employed on the clients. We set the rounds                                    Centralized       62.8     89.3
to nr = 300, with ne = 10 local epochs per                                      FedAvg           6.1     12.9
client (without augmentation). We consider                                  FedAvg + EMA        20.7     43.6
                                                                                FedProx         16.0     39.9
a federated setup with nk = 12 clients, where
                                                             NABirds            MOON             6.1     12.9
na = (2, 4) clients participate per-round. On-                                 FedHEAL           6.2     13.0
device federated finetuning on CompCars re-                                   FedPromo          30.3     65.0
quires ∼4 days. The peak learning rate was                                  EFFEKT (ours)       39.1     72.8
set to lrmax = 6 × 10−4 , and the batch size to                               Centralized       37.9     69.2
48. The number of active clients was chosen to                                  FedAvg           9.2     27.7
preserve approximately the same ratio as the                                FedAvg + EMA        12.4     39.0
simulated experiments (1/10), and the learn-                                    FedProx         10.4     33.8
                                                             Military
ing rate was chosen to achieve, on average, the                                 MOON             9.6     27.8
                                                             Aircraft
same gradient updates.                                                         FedHEAL           9.5     27.9
                                                                              FedPromo          11.9     32.1
Datasets                                                                    EFFEKT (ours)       12.5     33.7
To ensure fairness in the experimental evalu-                                 Centralized       13.6     34.2
ation, we evaluate EFFEKT on the same five                                      FedAvg          47.9     79.2
domain pairs used by Caligiuri et al. (2025).                               FedAvg + EMA        67.6     96.4
All datasets exhibit long-tailed class distribu-                                FedProx         68.0     95.0
                                                           OxfordPets           MOON            47.4     78.8
tion, having an average of 272 target classes
                                                                               FedHEAL          50.1     79.5
belonging to similar objects, and are distributed
                                                                              FedPromo          72.7     98.0
across clients according to a Dirichlet distribu-                           EFFEKT (ours)       72.3     96.6
tion with concentration parameter α = 1 (Hsu                                  Centralized       80.0     99.2
et al., 2019). In each scenario, a public source
dataset is used for pretraining, while a private target dataset is distributed across clients in a federated setting.
Specifically, the dataset couples are organized as follows: CUB200 (Wah et al., 2011) → NABirds (Van Horn
et al., 2015), ImageNetPets (Caligiuri et al., 2025) → OxfordPets (Parkhi et al., 2012), StanfordCars (Krause
et al., 2013) → CompCars (Yang et al., 2015), FGVCAircraft (Maji et al., 2013) → MilitaryAircraft (Nakamura,
2024), and Food101 (Bossard et al., 2014) → UECFOOD256 (Kawano & Yanai, 2014).




                                                         8
Table 2: Accuracy on multi-domain scenario. Known Domain: Table 3: Accuracy of D in identifying
query sample includes domain index i. Unknown Domain: D used the correct domain using prototypes
to estimate i (using pretraining in-domain dataset prototypes). from pretrain and target domains.

                        Known Domain       Unknown Domain
        Dataset
                        Top-1  Top-5      Top-1      Top-5                 Dataset        Dpdi -Acc   Ddi -Acc
       CompCars          43.0   75.0    42.7 − 0.3 74.6 − 0.4            CompCars           99.7       99.6
    UECFOOD256           62.1   88.8    61.4 − 0.7 87.7 − 1.1         UECFOOD256            99.5       98.5
        NABirds          39.1   72.8    38.5 − 0.6 71.7 − 0.9             NABirds           98.9       89.7
    Military Aircraft    12.5   33.7     8.0 − 4.5 20.3 −13.4         Military Aircraft     60.0       95.6
      OxfordPets         72.3   96.6    71.8 − 0.5 96.0 − 0.6           OxfordPets          99.2       97.1
         Average         45.8   73.4    44.5 − 1.3 70.1 − 3.3              Average          91.5       95.1


6     Experimental Results

To evaluate the performance of EFFEKT, we compare it against six competing federated strategies. The first
competitor is FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), a common federated learning baseline. The second, FedAvg +
EMA, is an extension that tackles client divergence by applying Exponential Moving Average (EMA) to the
model weights. The third (FedProx (Li et al., 2020)) and fourth (MOON (Li et al., 2021)) competitors are
benchmark distributed optimization techniques that actively tackle client divergence by analyzing differences
in the received weights. We consider the easiest (higher-accuracy) version of FedProx, where no straggler
clients are present. As the fifth competitor, we selected the recent FedHEAL (Chen et al., 2024) approach,
which extends the standard FedAVG aggregation, introducing a similarity-based reweighting factor.
The last competitor is FedPromo (Caligiuri et al., 2025), which introduced the ICP regularization we deploy
at the client-side. Finally, we provide the performance of a centralized configuration as a reference. Note that
all competitors are tested under the same conditions: i.e., frozen proxy encoders pretrained with distillation
on the public source dataset and classifier-only client training, while metrics are computed on the server
by attaching the classifier to the Foundation Model. Table 1 compares the Top-1 and Top-5 classification
accuracy of the server model Hkdi ◦ Odi with those of the competitors. Finally, we report the performance of
a centralized experiment implementing the EFFEKT bi-directional distillation. Here, a single client trains its
head on the full private dataset Ddi for nr = 500 rounds, while the server updates the domain-specific LoRAs.

6.1    Single Domain Results

Our approach surpasses competitors in most of the considered domains.                In particular, in the
StanfordCars→CompCars scenario, EFFEKT’s improvement over the second-best approach (FedPromo)
reaches 7.2% and 5.6% Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy, respectively. A similar result is achieved in the Top-1 accu-
racy of the Food101→UECFOOD256 scenario, where the improvement is 3.4%. Top-5, instead, gains a more
limited 0.1%. The highest gains are observed in the CUB200→NABirds scenario, where EFFEKT surpasses
competitors by more than 8.8% in Top-1 accuracy and 7.8% in Top-5. The FVGAircraft→MilitaryAircraft
scenario is the most challenging in our experiments, where results in absolute terms are limited for all
approaches, due to the topology of the scenes. The dataset was originally meant for Object Detection, so the
target class is often far in the sky, while other confounding objects occupy the foreground. In particular,
the highest Top-1 accuracy (12.5%) is achieved by EFFEKT, while the highest Top-5 (39.0%) is achieved
by FedAvg+EMA. The last configuration is the simplest, and all methods achieve remarkable accuracy.
EFFEKT ranks second very close to FedPromo, achieving a Top-1 accuracy of 72.3% and a Top-5 accuracy
of 96.6%. Finally, we remark that EFFEKT closely matches the centralized experiment in most domains.

6.2    Multi-Domain Results

Table 2 shows the accuracy achieved in the multi-domain scenario: in the first two columns, clients share
domain information to the server, while in the last two columns the information is withheld. The results in
Section 6.1 correspond to the case where the sample’s domain is known (i.e., when the server-side FM receives
a sample, the domain index is included). If this information is not provided, the domain classifier D must be


                                                       9
used to estimate it, which may lead to a decrease in accuracy due to domain misclassification. The Table
shows that the impact of this issue is limited, with a drop in Top-1 accuracy of less than 1% in all domains
except for MilitaryAircraft. For consistency, we also report the Top-5 accuracy, which exhibits a trend similar
to that of Top-1. These results are confirmed by Table 3, which reports the domain classification performance.
Using the pretraining datasets prototypes, the domain is recognized correctly with an accuracy of 99% for all
domains except MilitaryAircraft, where it drops to 60%. This domain proved harder to recognize, as the
images are significantly different from those in FGVCAircraft. In many images, the target aircraft appears
small and distant, while other objects occupy the foreground. In FGVCAircraft, instead, there is always a
plane as the main object. This semantic misalignment is also confirmed by the domain shift analysis provided
in Sec. A.5 of the Appendix. In the Table, we also report the accuracy when computing prototypes on the
target datasets; in this case the accuracy drop on MilitaryAircraft is restored.

6.3   On-device Training Results

Table 4 shows the accuracy achieved by our on-device
setup. We performed two different tests, setting the num- Table 4: Comparison of on-device and simulated
ber of active clients na to 2 and 4. The results confirm the experiments.
validity of our simulations, given the tight match between
experiments. Further validation experiments are in the                       Simulation      Deployment
                                                                na / nk
Appendix: it shows that the real and simulated validation                 Top-1 Top-5 Top-1 Top-5
accuracies match is preserved at all steps of the training        2 / 12    39.5     70.0    39.5    70.4
evolution (see Fig. A.3). We also measured the power              4 / 12    40.0     70.3    39.8    70.5
consumption and network usage throughout the federated           Average    39.8     70.2    39.7    70.5
optimization, as detailed in the Appendix. The former
never exceeds 7W and scales linearly with the number of active clients, while the latter never exceeds 5MB/s.
In Figures A.1 and A.2, we show both measures over a short time interval.


7     Ablation Studies

Component Analysis As a first ablation study, we Table 5: Ablation on the impact of the different mod-
evaluate the impact of the various components of our ules and losses.
architecture on performance using the CompCars
dataset. The results are shown in Table 5.                                  JA
                                                             C2S                           Top-1 Top-5
                                                                   LCE LL   KD     LFKD
When disabling both C2S and JA Distillations (i.e.,           ✗      ✗       ✗       ✗      35.8    69.4
using FedAVG for server-side aggregation), the Top-1          ✗      ✓       ✓       ✓      40.6    72.6
accuracy drops by more than 7% (the Top-5 exhibits            ✓      ✗       ✗       ✗      40.5    73.7
similar behavior, with a drop of almost 6% as well).          ✓      ✗       ✓       ✓      41.9    74.6
The impact of both components on Top-1 accuracy is            ✓      ✓       ✗       ✓      39.2    72.7
similar: when using only C2S or only JA, the drop in          ✓      ✓       ✓       ✗      41.2    72.7
performance is around 2.5% (from 43% to 40.6% and             ✓      ✓       ✓       ✓      43.0    75.0
40.5%, respectively). This finding demonstrates that
both strategies are necessary and complementary; by combining them, we achieve a noticeable improvement.
The Top-5 exhibits similar behavior, even though, according to this metric, the C2S strategy has a slightly
greater impact. This could stem from the missing cross-entropy objective, which tightens the entropy of the
predictions, leading to slightly higher Top-1 accuracy at the cost of Top-5. This is confirmed by the ablation
on the loss terms used in JA, where disabling the cross-entropy leads to a higher Top-5 accuracy compared
to the other partial configurations. Regardless, the experiments confirm the optimal configuration of our
approach, as using all components together yields the highest accuracy. To further validate the effectiveness
of our two distillation objectives, in Section A.3 of the Appendix we report the accuracy when C2S and JA
are not performed at every communication round. Overall, we observe an approximately linear increase in
performance with respect to the application frequency f ∈ [0, 1] (one every R rounds). More specifically, the
average performance on the server can be estimated as acc1 ≃ 7.93f + 35.3 and acc5 ≃ 6.05f + 69.1 with an
R2 value of 0.97 for both. As an additional study, we report the comparative analysis when swapping the client


                                                      10
encoder architecture to EfficientNet-B0 (Tan & Le, 2020). The results are reported in the Appendix (Figures
A.7 for Top-1 Accuracy and A.8 for Top-5 Accuracy), confirming a consistent improvement of EFFEKT with
respect to all other competitors (approximately 5% improvement over the second best, FedPromo, and 30%
over FedAvg). As additional ablation, we replaced the client encoder architecture with TinyViT-5m (Wu
et al., 2022); EFFEKT still works but, as ViTs tend to overfit on small data, yields inflated client-side
accuracy (+1.9%) at the cost of server-side performance (−3.4%); stable alignment also required lowering the
pretraining learning rate to 2.5 × 10−4 . The ViT client, even when falling below its CNN counterpart, remains
above all competitors (3% improvement over the second best, FedPromo, and 35% over FedAvg). As a final
note, we wish to highlight that distillation on the task-specific pretraining datasets alone is meaningless, as
the class-sets are disjoint from those of the clients. Our distillation approaches effectively tackle a data-free
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation task on the server (a complementary task to Source-Free UDA (Fang et al.,
2023), which uses only source data).
Hyperparameters
We also evaluate the impact of setting different values
for the algorithm hyperparameters. The balance between Table 6: Ablation on logit distillation loss weight.
feature and logits distillation in Eq. 2 is controlled by
the λLKD parameter. As shown in Table 6, the proposed
                                                                     λL
                                                                      KD     Top-1 Top-5
value of 0.01 leads to the best performance, while smaller          0.001     40.6      73.6
or larger values result in a decrease in performance for            0.005     41.5      73.8
both Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy. Another relevant design               0.01     43.0      75.0
                                                                     0.02     42.2      74.3
parameter is the rank for the LoRA adapters (Table 7).                0.1     41.7      74.5
Performance increases when using larger rank adapters
up to a certain point, but it decreases again after the
optimal value is achieved for rank 16. Additionally, we Table 7: Ablation on the rank of LoRA adapters.
report the performance achieved by training the full FM
                                                                    rank      Top-1 Top-5
without employing adapters (full FM ). The performance                 8       42.0      74.2
drops below that of rank 32, confirming that the decreasing           16       43.0      75.0
trend continues to full rank. We hypothesize that this is             32       41.5      73.9
due to the limited number of samples and the misalignment         full FM      41.3      71.1
between proxy and server features, which leads to overfitting
using larger adapters.
Federated Configuration
Here, we evaluate performance in different federated settings. We Table 8: Out-of-Domain pretraining
compared EFFEKT with the baseline FedAvg approach and the best results (averaged across domains).
competitor, i.e., Caligiuri et al. (2025), on the CompCars dataset.
We computed results by varying the number of rounds, the Dirichlet           Method    Top-1 Top-5
concentration parameter, and the total and active client numbers.            FedAvg     18.8  26.3
The detailed results are in the Appendix. Note how our approach          FedAvg + EMA   26.2  42.6
consistently outperforms the competitors in all the considered settings.     FedProx    22.2  34.6
Note that the standard deviation of the Top-1 accuracy of EFFEKT,            MOON       19.0  26.3
                                                                            FedHEAL     18.9  26.4
computed by running five experiments with different random seeds, is
                                                                           FedPromo    28.5  46.4
very limited (0.5%). This is on par with those of the competitors, in
                                                                         EFFEKT (ours)  28.3  45.7
spite of the higher mean values. Figures A.5 and A.6 in the Appendix       Centralized  28.8  46.8
show how this result is consistent across rounds.




                                                       11
Out-of-Domain Pretraining Results
In this section, we examine the performance of EFFEKT when using a large-scale out-of-domain pretraining
dataset (ImageNet-1k) instead of task-specific proxies; the corresponding results are presented in Table 8.
Due to the semantic mismatch, the accuracy drops considerably, with EFFEKT being affected more severely
than its closest competitor (FedPromo), largely due to the mismatch in data used by server-side distillation.
Despite this, our method still ranks second, achieving performance that is very close to the Centralized upper
bound. More details, including per-dataset results, are provided in Section A.3 of the Appendix.

8   Conclusions

In this paper, we introduced EFFEKT, a novel multi-domain federated learning framework enabling efficient
collaboration between lightweight client-side proxy models and a server-side Foundation Model. EFFEKT’s
key innovation lies in its bi-directional cross-distillation strategies and the efficient server-side training of
domain-specific LoRA adapters. Experiments conducted across multiple real-world datasets demonstrated
improvements in Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy in most scenarios. Additionally, we validated EFFEKT’s real-world
applicability through deployments on compute-constrained devices, confirming its efficiency in computation,
energy consumption, and network usage. This demonstrated EFFEKT’s suitability for privacy-sensitive
applications on personal devices, opening up new possibilities for AI in diverse domains.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by the European Union under the Italian National Recovery and Resilience
Plan (NRRP) of NextGenerationEU, partnership on "Telecommunications of the Future" (PE00000001-
program "RESTART"), by the NSF under grants CNS-2312875 and OAC-2530896; by AFOSR under grant
FA9550-23-1-0261; by ONR under grant N00014-23-1-2221; and by DARPA under Cooperative Agreement
D25AC00374-00.

Impact Statement

This work aims to advance the field of machine learning and does not introduce immediate or specific societal
consequences that require separate emphasis; however, it entails ethical considerations typical of decentralized
learning settings. In particular, although raw data remain on client devices, shared model components may
still be vulnerable to adversarial attacks that leak sensitive information, underscoring the importance of
privacy-preserving techniques. Additionally, decentralized training can encode local biases, which may lead
to unfair outcomes if not properly addressed. While the evaluations in this paper are designed to avoid these
concerns, caution is still warranted when deploying the proposed methods on sensitive private data, such as
facial images, in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, our foundation model optimization approach relies on
logits and latents access, which may not always be available, especially when interacting with API-based
closed-weight models. Finally, our work requires pretraining data with a reasonable alignment with the target
one (as FedPromo), which may not always be available in all domains.




                                                       12
References
Sara Babakniya, Ahmed Elkordy, Yahya Ezzeldin, Qingfeng Liu, Kee-Bong Song, MOSTAFA EL-Khamy, and
  Salman Avestimehr. SLoRA: Federated parameter efficient fine-tuning of language models. In International
  Workshop on Federated Learning in the Age of Foundation Models in Conjunction with NeurIPS 2023, 2023.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=06quMTmtRV.

Francesco Barbato, Umberto Michieli, Jijoong Moon, Pietro Zanuttigh, and Mete Ozay. Cross-architecture
  auxiliary feature space translation for efficient few-shot personalized object detection. In 2024 IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 8587–8594. IEEE, 2024.

Daniel J Beutel, Taner Topal, Akhil Mathur, Xinchi Qiu, Javier Fernandez-Marques, Yan Gao, Lorenzo Sani,
  Hei Li Kwing, Titouan Parcollet, Pedro PB de Gusmão, and Nicholas D Lane. Flower: A friendly federated
  learning research framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14390, 2020.

Lukas Bossard, Matthieu Guillaumin, and Luc Van Gool. Food-101–mining discriminative components with
  random forests. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Part VI, pp.
  446–461. Springer, 2014.

Matteo Caligiuri, Francesco Barbato, Donald Shenaj, Umberto Michieli, and Pietro Zanuttigh. FedPromo:
 Federated lightweight proxy models at the edge bring new domains to foundation models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2508.03356, 2025.

Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand
 Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 international conference on computer vision, pp. 9650–9660, 2021.

Hong-You Chen, Cheng-Hao Tu, Ziwei Li, Han Wei Shen, and Wei-Lun Chao. On the importance and
 applicability of pre-training for federated learning. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
 Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fWWFv--P0xP.

Yuhang Chen, Wenke Huang, and Mang Ye. Fair federated learning under domain skew with local consistency
  and domain diversity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 12077–12086, 2024.

J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image
   Database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   2009.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American
  chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and
  short papers), pp. 4171–4186, 2019.

Yuqi Fang, Pew-Thian Yap, Weili Lin, Hongtu Zhu, and Mingxia Liu. Source-free unsupervised domain
  adaptation: A survey, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.00265.

Marko Harasic, Dennis Lehmann, and Adrian Paschke. Evaluating federated dino’s performance on the
 segmentation task across diverse domains. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData),
 pp. 7784–7789, 2024. doi: 10.1109/BigData62323.2024.10825380.

Geoffrey Hinton. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

Chang Hongyan, Shejwalkar Virat, Shokri Reza, and Houmansadr Amir. Cronus: Robust and heterogeneous
  collaborative learning with black-box knowledge transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11279, 2019.

Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun Wang,
 Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al. Searching for mobilenetv3. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1314–1324, 2019.


                                                     13
Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data distribution
  for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.

Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, Weizhu
  Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2):3, 2022.

Eunjeong Jeong, Seungeun Oh, Hyesung Kim, Jihong Park, Mehdi Bennis, and Seong-Lyun Kim.
  Communication-efficient on-device machine learning: Federated distillation and augmentation under
  non-iid private data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.11479, 2018.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020.

Y. Kawano and K. Yanai. Automatic expansion of a food image dataset leveraging existing categories with
  domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the ECCV Workshop on Transferring and Adapting Source Knowledge
  in Computer Vision (TASK-CV), 2014.

Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao,
  Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4015–4026,
  October 2023.

Jonathan Krause, Michael Stark, Jia Deng, and Li Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for fine-grained
  categorization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, pp.
  554–561, 2013.

Daliang Li and Junpu Wang. Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model distillation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1910.03581, 2019.

Qinbin Li, Bingsheng He, and Dawn Song. Model-contrastive federated learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10713–10722, 2021.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated
  optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 2:429–450, 2020.

Yuxi Liu, Guibo Luo, and Yuesheng Zhu. Fedfms: Exploring federated foundation models for medical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
 Intervention, pp. 283–293. Springer, 2024.

Wang Lu, Xixu Hu, Jindong Wang, and Xing Xie. Fedclip: Fast generalization and personalization for clip in
 federated learning. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 2023.

S. Maji, J. Kannala, E. Rahtu, M. Blaschko, and A. Vedaldi. Fine-grained visual classification of aircraft.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.5151, 2013.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communication-
  efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.

T. Nakamura. Military aircraft detection dataset. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  a2015003713/militaryaircraftdetectiondataset, 2024.

John Nguyen, Jianyu Wang, Kshitiz Malik, Maziar Sanjabi, and Michael Rabbat. Where to begin? on the im-
  pact of pre-training and initialization in federated learning. In Proceedings of the 11th International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Mpa3tRJFBb.


                                                       14
Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Theo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre
 Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Hu Xu,
 Vasu Sharma, Shang-Wen Li, Wojciech Galuba, Mike Rabbat, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Gabriel
 Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, Herve Jegou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski.
 Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193, 2023.

Oleksiy Ostapenko, Timothee Lesort, Pau Rodriguez, Md Rifat Arefin, Arthur Douillard, Irina Rish, and
  Laurent Charlin. Continual learning with foundation models: An empirical study of latent replay. In
 Conference on lifelong learning agents, pp. 60–91. PMLR, 2022.

Omkar M Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman, and CV Jawahar. Cats and dogs. In 2012 IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3498–3505. IEEE, 2012.

PyTorch maintainers and contributors. Pytorch framework [software]. Available: https://github.com/
  pytorch/pytorch, 2016.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
  Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural
  language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.

Chao Ren, Han Yu, Hongyi Peng, Xiaoli Tang, Bo Zhao, Liping Yi, Alysa Ziying Tan, Yulan Gao, Anran Li,
 Xiaoxiao Li, et al. Advances and open challenges in federated foundation models. IEEE Communications
 Surveys & Tutorials, 2025.

Felix Sattler, Tim Korjakow, Roman Rischke, and Wojciech Samek. Fedaux: Leveraging unlabeled auxiliary
  data in federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 34(9):5531–5543,
  2021.

Donald Shenaj, Eros Fanì, Marco Toldo, Debora Caldarola, Antonio Tavera, Umberto Michieli, Marco Ciccone,
  Pietro Zanuttigh, and Barbara Caputo. Learning across domains and devices: Style-driven source-free
  domain adaptation in clustered federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on
 applications of computer vision, pp. 444–454, 2023a.

Donald Shenaj, Giulia Rizzoli, and Pietro Zanuttigh. Federated learning in computer vision. IEEE Access,
 2023b.

Jost Tobias Springenberg. Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning with categorical generative adversarial
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06390, 2015.

Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,
 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946.

TorchVision maintainers and contributors. Torchvision: Pytorch’s computer vision library [software]. Available:
  https://github.com/pytorch/vision, 2016.

Grant Van Horn, Steve Branson, Ryan Farrell, Scott Haber, Jessie Barry, Panos Ipeirotis, Pietro Perona, and
  Serge Belongie. Building a bird recognition app and large scale dataset with citizen scientists: The fine
  print in fine-grained dataset collection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2015.

Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. Technical Report CNS-TR-2011-001, Computation & Neural Systems, Caltech,
 2011.

Kan Wu, Jinnian Zhang, Houwen Peng, Mengchen Liu, Bin Xiao, Jianlong Fu, and Lu Yuan. Tinyvit: Fast
 pretraining distillation for small vision transformers. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
 68–85, 2022.


                                                      15
Zhiyuan Wu, Sheng Sun, Yuwei Wang, Min Liu, Quyang Pan, Junbo Zhang, Zeju Li, and Qingxiang Liu.
  Exploring the distributed knowledge congruence in proxy-data-free federated distillation. ACM Transactions
  on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(2):1–34, 2024.
Linjie Yang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. A large-scale car dataset for fine-grained
  categorization and verification. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 3973–3981, 2015.

Dezhong Yao, Wanning Pan, Yutong Dai, Yao Wan, Xiaofeng Ding, Chen Yu, Hai Jin, Zheng Xu, and
 Lichao Sun. Fedgkd: Toward heterogeneous federated learning via global knowledge distillation. IEEE
 Transactions on Computers, 73(1):3–17, 2023.
Liping Yi, Han Yu, Gang Wang, Xiaoguang Liu, and Xiaoxiao Li. pfedlora: Model-heterogeneous personalized
  federated learning with lora tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13283, 2023.

Liangqi Yuan, Ziran Wang, Lichao Sun, Philip S Yu, and Christopher G Brinton. Decentralized federated
  learning: A survey and perspective. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 11(21):34617–34638, 2024.
Lan Zhang, Dapeng Wu, and Xiaoyong Yuan. Fedzkt: Zero-shot knowledge transfer towards resource-
  constrained federated learning with heterogeneous on-device models. In 2022 IEEE 42nd International
 Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pp. 928–938. IEEE, 2022.

Zhuangdi Zhu, Junyuan Hong, and Jiayu Zhou. Data-free knowledge distillation for heterogeneous federated
  learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 12878–12889. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v139/zhu21b.html.




                                                    16
A     Appendix

In the following sections, we report the additional and supporting experiments that could not fit in the
main document due to space limitations. We begin by providing experiments varying all aspects of our
Federated Learning training configuration in Section A.1; we then move to Section A.2 that reports our power
and network consumption measurement setup, as well as our findings; Section A.3 reports some additional
quantitative experiments and some training evolution curves, highlighting the stability of out approach;
finally, in Section A.8 we report the pseudocode implementation for the remaining modules of EFFEKT.


A.1   Federated Configuration

This section contains additional experiments varying the Federated Learning configuration, comparing the
accuracy of EFFEKT, FedPromo, and FedAvg. In particular, Table A.1 focuses on the number of rounds,
Table A.2 on the number of total clients, Table A.3 on the number of active clients, and Table A.4 on the
Dirichlet concentration parameter α. The results show that the configuration reported in the main document
is optimal, leading to the best performance even when changing scenarios, e.g., using fewer clients, or more
active clients. We hypothesize that this depends on the bi-directional distillation hyperparameters, which
have been tuned with the target configuration.
Regarding the number of rounds, the EFFEKT results behave as expected: the shorter the training, the
lower the accuracy. This contrasts with FedPromo, where accuracy remains stable across 250–500 rounds,
and with FedAvg, where shorter training actually leads to better performance. The likely reason is that the
LoRA adapters in EFFEKT require a relatively larger number of steps to be properly optimized, while the
performance drop in FedAvg is caused by client divergence, which FedPromo effectively mitigates. However,
further increasing the length of the training beyond 500 rounds does not lead to better performance, e.g.,
with nr = 1000 rounds the top-1 accuracy is is 42.1% and the top-5 74.9%.
Interestingly, EFFEKT attains higher accuracy even for smaller values of the Dirichlet concentration parameter
α. This advantage stems from our C2S distillation, which is able to extract useful information from all client
updates (including slightly divergent ones). As a result, smaller α values lead to more informative update
directions, whereas larger values tend to pull the updates into a similar direction, thereby diminishing their
information content. Note how EFFEKT continues to have impressive performances across all settings, as
even its lowest accuracy surpasses the highest accuracy achieved by FedPromo. This trend continues at the
more extreme values of α = 0.5 and 0.1, which yield top-1 41.9/36.7, and top-5 73.3/67.6.



              Table A.1: Number of rounds.                       Table A.2: Number of total clients.

            FedAvg     FedPromo EFFEKT                            FedAvg     FedPromo EFFEKT
      nr                                                    nk
          top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5                   top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
      100 22.1 41.9 30.6 63.9 30.8 63.3                      50 10.6 22.5 36.2 68.4 40.8 72.4
      250 18.4 33.2 35.3 69.1 37.9 70.9                     100 14.0 27.4 35.8 69.4 43.0 75.0
      500 14.0 27.4 35.8 69.4 43.0 75.0                     150 12.8 24.0 29.6 59.3 39.0 70.5


           Table A.3: Number of active clients.           Table A.4: Dirichlet concentration parameter.

           FedAvg     FedPromo EFFEKT                             FedAvg     FedPromo EFFEKT
      na                                                     α
         top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5                    top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
       5 11.0 21.9 36.9 70.1 41.6 73.3                       1 14.0 27.4 35.8 69.4 43.0 75.0
      10 14.0 27.4 35.8 69.4 43.0 75.0                       10 12.0 24.0 37.1 70.4 42.4 74.4
      20 10.8 21.5 37.2 70.7 42.1 74.4                      100 12.5 24.7 37.3 70.1 42.1 74.0


                                                     17
A.2                            Power and Network Consumption

As noted in the main document, we deploy EFFEKT on a cluster of 12 compute-constrained real devices,
connected to the server and to each other via a LAN network. More specifically, to measure their power
consumption, we clustered the clients by manufacturer (Raspberry Pi Foundation vs. NVIDIA), plugging each
group into a different Sonoff S31 (Shenzhen Sonoff Technologies Co., Ltd., 2015) smart power plug (running
TASMOTA firmware (Tasmota maintainers and contributors, 2017)). In the first group, we included 3
Raspberry Pi 4 and 3 Raspberry Pi 5; in the second group, we had 5 Jetson Nano and 1 Jetson Orin-Nano.
Logging was performed using an open source MQTT broker (Mosquitto (Eclipse Foundation, 2009)) and a
Python script that polls the server every second. Regarding the network statistics, to avoid affecting the
measurements, we deployed a Grafana dashboard (Grafana Labs, 2013) on a separate machine (distinct from
the server and clients) that receives information from a Prometheus service (Prometheus maintainers and
contributors, 2013) running on each client via a separate network interface.
We measure an average power consumption across the federated optimization of 2.1W and 3.6W by the
Raspberry Pi devices, under na = 2 and na = 4, respectively. The NVIDIA boards absorb approximately
70% more power, landing at 3.3W and 6.3W under the same configurations. In Figure A.1, we plot the
consumption on both configurations over a small time slice. The spikiness of the plot is a consequence of the
active client sampling of the server. A full training with 2 active clients absorbs ∼ 3.5kWh, split in 1.5kWh
for Jetson and 2kWh for Raspberry (sampled more often, as they are faster).
A similar plot, showing the network usage over a time window, is reported in Figure A.2. Most of the clients’
throughput is in downloads since they need to update the full local model (encoder and head) at each round,
but they only send the head to the server. This is confirmed by the global statistics, which never exceed
4MB/s in RX, and 60kB/s in TX. Moreover, on average each client transmits 3.7MB (which closely matches
the size of Hkdi ) and receives 47.9MB.

A.3                            Additional Experiments

Figures A.3 and A.4 report the Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy achieved by EFFEKT on the CompCars dataset
under configurations with 2 and 4 active clients, comparing simulated experiments against real-device
deployments. The results obtained on real hardware closely match those observed in simulation, providing
strong evidence for the reliability of our simulated setup. As expected, increasing the number of active clients
from 2 to 4 leads to higher accuracy; however, the performance gap remains relatively small. This limited
difference highlights the robustness and stability of EFFEKT, which is enabled by its bidirectional distillation
mechanism and allows the framework to perform consistently even with fewer participating clients.


                                                                                                                     4000                              Client RX Throughput
                                                                                                 Throughput (kB/s)




                                                                                                                     3000
                        17.5           2 clients - Raspberry Pi      2 clients - Jetson
                                       4 clients - Raspberry Pi      4 clients - Jetson                              2000
                        15.0           Average
                                                                                                                     1000
Power Consumption (W)




                        12.5
                                                                                                                                 0
                        10.0                                                                                                         0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5    10.0 12.5      15.0   17.5
                                                                                                                                                        Time (5min intervals)
                         7.5                                                                                                                           Client TX Throughput
                         5.0
                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                            Throughput (kB/s)




                         2.5
                                                                                                                                40
                         0.0
                                0     200         400          600        800             1000                                  20
                                                         Time (s)
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                     0.0   2.5   5.0      7.5    10.0 12.5      15.0   17.5
Figure A.1: Training power consumption (short time                                                                                                      Time (5min intervals)
window).
                                                                                                 Figure A.2: Training network usage (short time win-
                                                                                                 dow).


                                                                                                 18
                 40       2 active clients                                                                                       2 active clients
                          4 active clients                                                                              70       4 active clients
                          on-device                                                                                              on-device
                 35       simulated                                                                                              simulated
                                                                                                                        65
                                                                           Zoomed View                                                                                           Zoomed View
Accuracy




                                                                                                       Accuracy
                                                         40.00
                 30                                                                                                     60                                      70.4
                                                         39.75
                                                                                                                                                                70.2
                                                         39.50
                 25                                                                                                     55                                      70.0
                                                         39.25
                                                                                                                                                                69.8
                                                         39.00                                                          50
                 20                                                                                                                                             69.6
                                                                 260 265 270 275 280 285 290 295 300                                                                   260 265 270 275 280 285 290 295 300
                      0        50            100           150             200       250         300                         0        50            100          150             200       250         300
                                                           Round                                                                                                 Round


Figure A.3: Top-1 acc. on simulated and real devices. Figure A.4: Top-5 acc. on simulated and real devices.


Furthermore, Figures A.5 and A.6 illustrate the training evolution of Top-1 and Top-5 accuracy across
communication rounds, including a shaded region representing the confidence interval computed over 5
independent runs with different random seeds. EFFEKT consistently outperforms all competing methods
throughout training, exceeding the closest baseline, FedPromo, by more than 5% in both metrics. Notably, the
confidence intervals (for both Top-1 and Top-5) of EFFEKT never overlap with those of the other approaches,
providing clear evidence that the observed improvements are statistically significant and robust.
As additional validation, in Figures A.7 and A.8 we analyze training dynamics when changing the client-side
architecture, from MobileNetV3-Small to EfficientNet-B0, and compare EFFEKT with FedPromo and FedAvg.



                 40                                                                                                     70
                 35                                                                                                     60
                                                                    FedAvg                 MOON                                                                           FedAvg                 MOON
                 30                                                 FedAvg + EMA           FedPromo                                                                       FedAvg + EMA           FedPromo
Top-1 accuracy




                                                                                                       Top-1 accuracy




                                                                    FedProx                Ours                         50                                                FedProx                Ours
                 25                                                 FedHEAL                                                                                               FedHEAL
                 20                                                                                                     40

                 15                                                                                                     30
                 10                                                                                                     20
                      0             100            200               300           400           500                         0             100            200              300           400           500
                                                           Round                                                                                                 Round


Figure A.5: Validation server top-1 accuracy evolu- Figure A.6: Validation server top-5 accuracy evolu-
tion.                                               tion.

                                                                                                                        70
                 35
                                                                                                                        60
                 30

                                                                                                                        50
                 25
                                                                                           Ours                                                                                                  Ours
Accuracy




                                                                                                       Accuracy




                                                                                           FedAvg                       40                                                                       FedAvg
                 20                                                                        FedPromo                                                                                              FedPromo
                 15                                                                                                     30


                 10                                                                                                     20


                      0             100            200               300           400           500                         0             100            200              300           400           500
                                                          Round                                                                                                 Round


Figure A.7: Validation server top-1 accuracy evolu- Figure A.8: Validation server top-5 accuracy evolu-
tion using EfficientNet-B0 as client encoder.       tion using EfficientNet-B0 as client encoder.


                                                                                                       19
In this setting, FedAvg collapses in both Top-1 Table A.5: Accuracy on multi-domain scenario. Domain
and Top-5 accuracy, whereas FedPromo and Knowledge: query sample includes domain index i. Unknown
EFFEKT remain stable across training rounds. Domain: D used to estimate i.
Despite EfficientNet-B0 having a larger num-
ber of parameters and relying on a different                   Domain Knowledge Unknown Domain
                                                    Dataset
architectural design compared to the standard                   Top-1   Top-5     Top-1      Top-5
classification head, overall performance is lower  CompCars      43.0    75.0   42.7 − 0.3 74.6 − 0.4
than in previous experiments.                     UECFOOD256     62.1    88.8   60.6 − 1.5 86.9 − 1.9
                                                    NABirds           39.1    72.8   33.7 − 5.4 62.7 − 10.1
Nevertheless, EFFEKT maintains a clear ad- Military Aircraft 12.5           33.7   11.8 − 0.7 31.7 − 2.0
vantage, achieving approximately a 5% improve-     OxfordPets      72.3     96.6   70.5 − 1.8 94.0 − 2.6
ment over FedPromo in both accuracy metrics,         Average       45.8     73.4 43.9 − 1.9 70.0 − 3.4
further demonstrating its robustness to archi-
tectural changes on the client side.             Table A.6: Out-of-domain experiments. Federated Top-1
In Table A.5, we report results analogous to and Top-5 accuracy (↑) starting from ImageNet-1k (1000
those presented in Table 2 of the main paper, classes) pretraining. Best in bold, second-best underlined.
with the key difference that the prototypes of
the domain classifier are computed using the                                             DINOv2
                                                        Dataset D        Method
                                                                                       Top-1 Top-5
private target-domain data rather than the task-                          FedAvg        1.2     3.9
specific pretraining datasets.                                        FedAvg + EMA      3.0     9.7
                                                                             FedProx      2.4      8.5
Overall, the results closely match those ob-                                 MOON         1.3      3.9
tained in the main table, thereby further val-           CompCars
                                                                            FedHEAL       1.2      4.0
idating the effectiveness and consistency of                               FedPromo       3.3     10.8
the proposed approach. The only notable                                  EFFEKT (ours)    2.9     10.1
deviation is observed on the MilitaryAircraft                              Centralized    3.3      9.8
dataset, where performance improves substan-                                 FedAvg       2.1      6.9
                                                                         FedAvg + EMA    23.5     48.4
tially. This gain can be attributed to the re-                               FedProx      4.0     13.2
moval of the domain shift between MilitaryAir-                               MOON         2.0      7.1
                                                     UECFOOD256
craft and its previously coupled domain, FGV-                               FedHEAL       2.1      7.0
CAircraft, when prototypes are derived directly                            FedPromo      24.0     48.5
from the target data. It is important to em-                             EFFEKT (ours)   24.9     49.4
                                                                           Centralized   26.1     52.5
phasize, however, that these results should be                               FedAvg       1.5      5.1
interpreted strictly as upper bounds, since in a                         FedAvg + EMA    11.3     29.1
realistic federated deployment, the server does                              FedProx     10.5     26.6
not have access to the clients’ private target-                              MOON         1.6      5.0
                                                          NABirds
domain data.                                                                FedHEAL       1.4      4.9
                                                                           FedPromo      18.5     48.6
Furthermore, Table A.6 presents companion re-                            EFFEKT (ours)   16.5     44.5
sults to Table 1 in the main document, obtained                            Centralized   16.7     43.0
by replacing the multiple task-specific pretrain-                            FedAvg       5.1     16.2
                                                                         FedAvg + EMA     8.0     25.8
ing datasets with a single generic dataset, Im-                              FedProx      8.3     24.8
ageNet. In this setting, performances degrade             Military           MOON         5.3     16.2
significantly across most domains. This drop              Aircraft          FedHEAL       5.1     16.5
highlights that the client-side encoder alone is                           FedPromo       7.1     24.1
not sufficiently expressive to accurately approx-                        EFFEKT (ours)    8.0     24.6
                                                                           Centralized    9.2     28.8
imate the server-side foundation model, lead-                                FedAvg      84.0     99.5
ing to increased representation misalignment                             FedAvg + EMA    85.2     99.8
during federated training. Despite this limi-                                FedProx     85.6     99.9
tation, EFFEKT achieves performances that                                    MOON        84.7     99.5
                                                         OxfordPets
are largely comparable to both FedPromo and                                 FedHEAL      84.5     99.5
                                                                           FedPromo      89.5     99.8
centralized training in most configurations. Ab-
                                                                         EFFEKT (ours)   89.0     99.9
solute accuracy remains low for nearly all do-                             Centralized   88.5     99.9
mains, with the notable exception of Oxford-



                                                    20
Pets, which is effectively task-specific with respect to ImageNet, as its samples are drawn from the same
validation set.
Finally, in Table A.7, we report the final server accuracy when our
two distillation techniques (C2S and JA) are not performed at every                  Frequency     Top-1   Top-5
communication round. The results suggest a roughly linear relationship             0 (FedPromo)     35.8    69.4
between the frequency of the distillation and the server performance.                   1/10        35.4    69.0
More specifically, we report the performance when C2S and JA are en-                     1/5        36.6    70.5
                                       1
abled with frequency f = {1, 12 , 51 , 10 , 0} rounds. Linear fitting attains            1/2        40.0    72.5
the following relationship between the two metrics: acc1 ≃ 7.93f + 35.3            1 (EFFEKT)       43.0    75.0
and acc5 ≃ 6.05f + 69.1 with an R2 value of 0.97 for both.
                                                                                Table A.7: Accuracy vs. distillation
                                                                                frequency.
A.4   Privacy Considerations

In this section, we provide some preliminary results applying Local
Differential Privacy with norm clipping to our proposed aggregation             FedPromo       EFFEKT
                                                                          ε
scheme. For fair comparison, we follow the same configuration as              top-1 top-5 top-1 top-5
Caligiuri et al. (2025). The results are reported in Table A.8, where     ✗    35.8   69.4   43.0   75.0
we compare the performance of FedPromo and EFFEKT across a wide          50    34.7   67.8   39.6   71.5
range of ε values after fixing δ = 10−5 on the CompCars dataset.         10    33.6   66.6   39.0   70.7
Overall, the performance consistently surpasses that of FedPromo and      5    31.0   62.4   35.6   66.5
only begins to noticeably deteriorate when very small values of ε are    2.5   24.7   54.0   27.5   56.2
                                                                          1    14.2   33.7   15.1   33.9
used (ε = 2.5, 1). Note that, in this setting, the privacy guarantor is
based on the moments accountant (Abadi et al., 2016) with composition
                                                                        Table A.8: Accuracy with LocalDP.
over nr = 500 rounds and the Poisson subsampling amplification from
the active-client sampling (na /nk = 0.1)
Another theoretical privacy guarantee is provided by the limited number of trainable parameters on the
clients, more specifically, theorem 4.1 in Zhang & Chen (2024). In our case, the limiting factor of the rank of
J ∈ Rd×(B·p) is the number of parameters d, as batch size B and input dimensionality p are large.

A.5    Domain Shift Study

We employed the CLIP-I and DINO metrics (Ruiz et al., 2023) computed between dataset prototypes (i.e.,
the mean feature vectors over all samples in each dataset) to quantify domain shift across datasets. The
corresponding results are shown in Figure A.9. The DINO metric focuses on the semantic content of images,
providing a clear measure of domain shift; conversely, the CLIP-I metric is more sensitive to stylistic properties,
which may lead to inflated scores, as all images are real-world photographs without additional stylization.
From the figure, we observe that the pre-training datasets exhibit reasonably good, though heterogeneous,
alignment with their respective target datasets. At the same time, their content differs, with an average
(DINO) cosine similarity of about 0.67. Notably, the two aircraft datasets show weaker alignment than the
others, which partially accounts for the lower performance in this scenario. The CLIP-I metric broadly tracks
the behavior of DINO but yields consistently higher minimum similarity values. This effect arises from the
fact that all images are real-world, which biases CLIP-I toward higher similarity scores.

A.6    Server-Side Compute Costs

In this section, we report additional information on the computational cost (wall-clock time and maximum
VRAM) incurred by the Server when running the EFFEKT pipeline.
Regarding wall-clock time, the server-side overhead introduced by C2S and JA is moderate and scales
predictably with distillation frequency (one-every-x rounds, 1:x). Note that all measurements reported in the
following include also the cost of simulating na = 10 active clients for each of the nr = 500 rounds.
Starting from a baseline of 9h (no C2S/JA, i.e., only clients), adding server-side distillation increases training
time to 11.1h, 11.7h, and 13.2h for 1:10, 1:5, and 1:2 distillation ratios, respectively. The full EFFEKT


                                                         21
                                 DINO (Semantic Similarity)                                   CLIP-I (Style Similarity)
                     1.00 0.71 0.01 0.01 0.07 0.08 0.11 0.08 0.10 0.07         1.00 0.94 0.61 0.61 0.59 0.59 0.67 0.66 0.64 0.65 stan
             ford                                                                                                                      ford
       stan
                rs   0.71 1.00 -0.01 0.00 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.07        0.94 1.00 0.57 0.60 0.57 0.58 0.67 0.67 0.60 0.60 omc
           pca                                                                                                                         pca
     com                                                                                                                                   rs
                     0.01 -0.01 1.00 0.68 0.04 0.03 0.01 0.03 0.06 0.05        0.61 0.57 1.00 0.94 0.61 0.62 0.51 0.56 0.67 0.67 food
             101                                                                                                                       101
       food
                     0.01 0.00 0.68 1.00 0.03 0.03 -0.01 0.03 0.07 0.03        0.61 0.60 0.94 1.00 0.63 0.63 0.54 0.58 0.66 0.67 uec
            food                                                                                                                     food
       uec
                     0.07 0.06 0.04 0.03 1.00 0.91 0.12 0.08 0.24 0.22         0.59 0.57 0.61 0.63 1.00 0.99 0.62 0.68 0.74 0.74 cub
             200                                                                                                                      200
         cub
                     0.08 0.07 0.03 0.03 0.91 1.00 0.15 0.12 0.27 0.24         0.59 0.58 0.62 0.63 0.99 1.00 0.63 0.71 0.74 0.74 nab
             irds                                                                                                                     irds
         nab
                     0.11 0.08 0.01 -0.01 0.12 0.15 1.00 0.41 0.04 0.08        0.67 0.67 0.51 0.54 0.62 0.63 1.00 0.84 0.55 0.55 fgvc
              _air                                                                                                                     _air
        fgvc
                     0.08 0.07 0.03 0.03 0.08 0.12 0.41 1.00 0.12 0.10         0.66 0.67 0.56 0.58 0.68 0.71 0.84 1.00 0.64 0.63 mili
             tary                                                                                                                    tary
        mili
               ets   0.10 0.08 0.06 0.07 0.24 0.27 0.04 0.12 1.00 0.71         0.64 0.60 0.67 0.66 0.74 0.74 0.55 0.64 1.00 0.99 imn
                                                                                                                                      et_p
     m n et_p                                                                                                                               ets
   i                 0.07 0.07 0.05 0.03 0.22 0.24 0.08 0.10 0.71 1.00                                                             o
                                                                               0.65 0.60 0.67 0.67 0.74 0.74 0.55 0.63 0.99 1.00 xfo
                rd
          oxfo                                                                                                                         rd
                                                                                 stan com food uec cub nab fgvc mili imn oxfo
                  ford cars 101 food 200 birds c_air itary pets oxford               ford pca 101 food 200 irds _air tary et_p rd
              stan comp food uec cub na fgv mil imnet_                                       rs                                ets


                                                 Figure A.9: DINO and CLIP-I metrics.


configuration requires 17h, which rises to 21.3h when replacing LoRA with full DINO fine-tuning, while
ablated variants (EFFEKT no JA, EFFEKT no C2S) fall at 15.4h and 13.2h, respectively. From these
results, we can estimate an average additional cost of 1.5m/round when C2S and JA are enabled (with C2S
accounting for 60.4% of the additional cost and JA the remaining 39.6%).
Regarding GPU memory (VRAM), the footprint remains approximately constant across C2S/JA configurations,
since the classifiers involved in C2S are negligible in size compared to the DINO encoder. The more meaningful
differences emerge when comparing optimization strategies: FedPromo requires ∼ 11GB, EFFEKT ∼ 14GB
(thanks to the parameter efficiency of LoRA adapters), and full fine-tuning of the DINO encoder ∼ 19GB (all
at batch size 64). Overall, these results support the efficiency claim of EFFEKT, demonstrating a favorable
trade-off between server-side cost and performance gains.

A.7          Statistical Analysis
                                                            Table A.9: Mean µ and Standard Deviation σ of
As supporting evidence for the results reported in Figures
                                                            the top-1 and top-5 accuracy of the final round.
A.5 and A.6, we also computed the average and standard
deviation of the final-round top-1 and top-5 accuracy. The                          top-1        top-5
results are reported in Table A.9, and they confirm the             Dataset
                                                                                   µ      σ     µ      σ
stability of EFFEKT. More specifically, across all datasets       CompCars        42.4 0.5 74.6 0.4
and metrics, our method enjoys very tight bounds on the         UECFOOD256 62.0 0.1 88.9 0.1
distribution. The standard deviation never exceeds the             NABirds        39.4 0.3 72.8 0.2
1% mark, except for the top-1 accuracy in the Oxford-           MilitaryAircraft 12.2 0.5 33.7 0.2
Pets dataset, confirming that the gains reported in the           OxfordPets      73.8 1.5 96.9 0.3
experimental evaluation are statistically significant.




                                                                          22
A.8     EFFEKT Pseudocode

In this section, we report the pseudocode implementation of EFFEKT. We begin by detailing the EFFEKT
domain identification pipeline in Algorithm A.1. We then report a detailed description of the EFFEKT
ClientRound, implementing the ICP regularization (Caligiuri et al., 2025), in Algorithm A.2, and of our two
main components (C2S and JA) in Algorithms A.3 and A.4.




Algorithm A.1 EFFEKT Multi-Domain Server Inference.
Require: Server encoder Ô, domain classifier D, domain LoRAs {Ldi }i∈I , domain heads {Hkdi }i∈I
Input: Input image X
 1: i ← D(X)                                                               // Compute domain index
 2: O di ← ApplyLoRA       Ô, Ldi                                                   // Apply correct LoRA
      O       di
 3: F     ← O (X)                                                                      // Compute features
 4: LO ← H di (X)                                                                        // Compute logits
 5: ỹ ← ArgMaxy∈Y (LO [y])                                                          // Compute prediction
Output: ỹ

Algorithm A.2 EFFEKT ClientRound.
Require: Number of local epochs ne , domain index i, client index j, batch size b, encoder E di
Input: Previous round’s head Hkdi , and current lr
                            d         d
 1: Initialize local model Mk i ← Hk i ◦ E di
                              j
 2: for e ← 1 . . . ne do             
 3:   Mkdji ← epochICP Mkdji , b, lr, e                           // See Caligiuri et al. (2025) for details
 4: end for
                            d            d
 5: Extract current head Hk i from Mk i
                             j            j

Send: Hkdji to server


Algorithm A.3 EFFEKT Clients-to-Server distillation.
Require: Domain index i, server encoder Ô, pretraining dataset Dpdi , batch size b
Input: LoRA Ldi , previous round’s encoder E di , updated heads from clients Kadi : Hdi = {Hkdji }j∈Kdi
                                                                                                   a

 1: O di ← ApplyLoRA Ô, Ldi
 2: for q ← 1 . . . ⌊|Dpdi |/b⌋ do
 3:   Extract b samples from dataset Dpdi into B
 4:   l←0                                                                             // Initialize batch loss
 5:   for (X, y) ∈ B do
 6:     FO ← Odi (X)                                                                    // Extract Features
 7:     FE ← E di (X)
 8:     for H di ∈ Hdi do
 9:        LO ← H di (FO )                                                               // Compute Logits
10:        LE ← H di (FE )
11:        l ← l + LL
                    KD (LO , LE )                                                        // Accumulate loss
12:     end for
13:   end for
14:   Ldi ← AdamOptim(Ldi , l)                                                             // Update LoRA
15: end for
Output: Ldi


                                                     23
Algorithm A.4 EFFEKT Joint Alignment distillation.
Require: Domain index i, server encoder Ô, pretraining dataset Dpdi , batch size b, logit KD loss weight λL
                                                                                                           KD
Input: Aggregated client model Mkdi , LoRA Ldi , pretraining head Hpdi
                            
 1: O di ← ApplyLoRA Ô, Ldi
      d              d
 2: Hk i ◦ E di = Mk i                                                   // Split model in encoder and head
 3: for q ← 1 . . . ⌊|Dpdi |/b⌋ do
 4:   Extract b samples from dataset Dpdi into B
       L
 5:   lKD   ←0                                                              // Initialize batch logits KD loss
       F
 6:   lKD   ←0                                                            // Initialize batch feature KD loss
 7:   lCE ← 0                                                           // Initialize batch cross entropy loss
 8:   for (X, y) ∈ B do
 9:      FO ← Odi (X)                                                                    // Extract features
10:      FE ← E di (X)
11:      LO ← Hkdi (FO )                                                                // Client head logits
12:      LE ← Hkdi (FE )
13:      LO      di  O
           p ← Hp (F )                                                            // Pretraining head logits
           E     di  E
14:      Lp ← Hp (F )
          F      F
15:      lKD ← lKD  + LF       O    E     F      E
                         KD (F , F ) + LKD (F , F )
                                                   O
          L      L       L     O    E     L      E O
16:      lKD ← lKD + LKD (L , L ) + LKD (L , L )
17:      lCE ← lCE + LCE (LO                E
                             p , y) + LCE (Lp , y)
18:   end for
                  F
19:   l ← lCE + lKD  + λL       L
                          KD · lKD                                                          // Merge losses
         di     di
20:   Mk ← Hk ◦ Edi
                                                                                     // Merge client model
21:    Ldi , Mkdi , Hpdi ← AdamOptim(Ldi , Mkdi , Hpdi , l)                               // Update Models
22: end for
                         
Output: Mkdi , Ldi , Hpdi




                                                       24
References
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang.
 Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
 and Communications Security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Matteo Caligiuri, Francesco Barbato, Donald Shenaj, Umberto Michieli, and Pietro Zanuttigh. FedPromo:
 Federated lightweight proxy models at the edge bring new domains to foundation models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2508.03356, 2025.
Eclipse Foundation. Eclipse mosquitto [software]. Available: https://mosquitto.org/, 2009.
Grafana Labs. Graphana dashboard [software]. Available: https://grafana.com/, 2013.
Prometheus maintainers and contributors. Prometheus [software]. Available: https://prometheus.io, 2013.

Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Dreambooth:
  Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 22500–22510, 2023.
Shenzhen Sonoff Technologies Co., Ltd. Sonoff [hardware]. Available: https://sonoff.tech/, 2015.

Tasmota maintainers and contributors. Tasmota firmware [software]. Available: https://tasmota.github.
  io/docs/, 2017.
Xiaojin Zhang and Wei Chen. Theoretical analysis of privacy leakage in trustworthy federated learning: A
  perspective from linear algebra and optimization theory, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16735.




                                                   25
