                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                         T I T OK : T RANSFER T OKEN - LEVEL K NOWLEDGE VIA
                                         C ONTRASTIVE E XCESS TO T RANSPLANT L O RA
                                          Chanjoo Jung1 , Jaehyung Kim1
                                          1
                                           Yonsei University
                                          {chanjoo0427,jaehyungk}@yonsei.ac.kr



                                                                                         A BSTRACT
arXiv:2510.04682v3 [cs.CL] 14 May 2026




                                                      Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely applied in real world scenarios,
                                                      yet fine-tuning them comes with significant computational and storage costs.
                                                      Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods such as LoRA mitigate these
                                                      costs; however, the adapted parameters are dependent on the base model and can-
                                                      not be transferred across different backbones. One way to address this issue is
                                                      through knowledge distillation, but its effectiveness inherently depends on training
                                                      data. Recent work such as TransLoRA avoids this by generating synthetic data;
                                                      nevertheless, this adds complexity since it requires training an additional discrim-
                                                      inator model. In this paper, we propose T I T OK, a new framework that enables
                                                      effective LoRA Transplantation through Token-level knowledge transfer. Specif-
                                                      ically, T I T OK captures task-relevant information through a token-wise contrastive
                                                      excess between a source model with and without LoRA. This excess highlights
                                                      informative tokens and enables selective filtering of synthetic data, all without ad-
                                                      ditional models or overhead. Through experiments on three benchmarks across
                                                      multiple transfer settings, we demonstrate that T I T OK is consistently effective,
                                                      achieving average performance gains of + 4–10% compared to baselines overall.1


                                         1        I NTRODUCTION

                                         Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2023) have made significant
                                         progress in many real-world applications, including chatbots (OpenAI et al., 2024), search engines
                                         (Xiong et al., 2024), and coding assistants (Rozière et al., 2024). While fine-tuning LLMs has been
                                         demonstrated to be a promising way to improve performance on downstream tasks, it incurs sub-
                                         stantial computational and storage costs. To alleviate this, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
                                         (Houlsby et al., 2019) methods such as LoRA (Hu et al., 2021) update only a small subset of param-
                                         eters while keeping the base model frozen. However, PEFT’s adapted parameters are dependent to
                                         the base model and thus cannot be transferred across different models. This limitation is increasingly
                                         critical given the rapid release of new LLMs and the growing diversity of available models.
                                         One potential approach to mitigate this limitation is Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al.,
                                         2015; Azimi et al., 2024), which transfers the knowledge embedded in a source model’s PEFT
                                         adapters to a target model with new PEFT adapters by aligning the target’s output distributions
                                         with those of the source. However, KD is inherently data-dependent, typically requiring access to
                                         training data from target downstream tasks (Nayak et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2024), which is often
                                         unavailable or costly to obtain. To address this limitation, TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024) has
                                         recently proposed to use synthetic data, leveraging the data synthesis capabilities of recent LLMs
                                         (Wang et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2025). This approach enables the target model to acquire domain
                                         knowledge without direct access to the original dataset. Nevertheless, TransLoRA requires training
                                         an additional discriminator model to filter low-quality synthetic data, which inevitably introduces
                                         extra complexity and computational overhead. Furthermore, it primarily emphasizes the role of
                                         synthetic data, paying less attention to how the knowledge transfer process itself should be designed.
                                         Contribution. In this paper, we propose a new framework that enables effective LoRA
                                         Transplantation through Token-level knowledge transfer (T I T OK). Our high-level idea is to se-
                                              1
                                                  Code available at https://github.com/NaughtyMaltiz16/TiTok


                                                                                               1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                                                                                           GOAL
     5 seed prompts
                                                                              IF

                                    source_base + LoRA     source_base                   b

                                                                                                           LoRA
    source_base + LoRA
                         Contrastive Excess Filtering Mechanism                    Tokenization      Knowledge Transfer
                                                                                    Alignment

         q
         y
                          q
         q                y                       q
         y                                        y
                          q
         q                y                       q                y Local Man Buys Treadmill …
         y                                        y
                          q
             ...




                                                      ..
                          y                                                                        target_base + new LoRA
                              ...




    Synthetic Data                         Sample Filtering           Token Selection             Target Model Learning
      Generation




Figure 1: Overview of T I T OK: Transplantation through Token-level knowledge transfer. Starting
from a small set of seed prompts, the source expert model (source base model + LoRA) generates
synthetic data. A token-wise contrastive excess filtering mechanism then compares the expert
against its base backbone to compute token-level excess scores. Using these scores, T I T OK first per-
forms sample filtering and subsequently token selection, retaining only the most informative samples
and tokens. When tokenizers differ, masks are aligned prior to training. The resulting filtered data
is finally used to train a new LoRA on the target backbone, enabling efficient knowledge transfer.


lectively convey task-relevant information from the source model’s LoRA by using token-level sig-
nals to guide the transfer process, rather than relying on the entire token sequence. We specifically
capture this information through a concept we introduce as token-wise contrastive excess, which is
obtained by comparing predictions from a source model with LoRA and the same model without
LoRA. Intuitively, this token-wise contrastive excess highlights tokens that contain important task
knowledge. This excess signal is further utilized to filter the generated synthetic data for training,
thereby enabling selective learning on samples that contain richer information. Unlike TransLoRA,
which requires training an additional discriminator model for filtering, T I T OK requires neither extra
models nor additional training overhead. Moreover, we design an effective mechanism to resolve
tokenizer mismatches between source and target models, enhancing robustness and applicability.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of T I T OK by conducting extensive experiments on three widely
used benchmarks, which cover both reasoning (Big Bench Hard (Suzgun et al., 2022) and MMLU
(Hendrycks et al., 2021)) and personalization tasks (LaMP (Salemi et al., 2024)). In particular,
T I T OK improves the performance by +9.94% over the vanilla target model, +8.5% over KD, and
+4.4% over TransLoRA, when averaged across all tasks and transfer settings. We also explored
a variety of transfer settings, including transfers within the same model, across different model
families and sizes, and even across different model versions. In every case, our approach achieves
consistent improvements. Interestingly, T I T OK remains effective even when applied to external
data originating from tasks different from the target task, highlighting both robustness and general
applicability. Overall, these empirical results highlight T I T OK as a methodologically simple yet
powerful paradigm for efficiently transferring LoRA knowledge across models in diverse scenarios.

2     R ELATED W ORKS

Transferring PEFT adapters. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) (Houlsby et al., 2019; Li
& Liang, 2021) has emerged as both a practical and popular alternative to full model fine-tuning.
By requiring updates to only a small portion of parameters, it enables efficient adaptation, with
LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) (Hu et al., 2021; Dettmers et al., 2023) standing out as one of the
most widely adopted methods. However, a fundamental limitation is that LoRA adapters are tied
to the frozen backbone they were trained on, making them difficult to transfer to other base models.
To address this issue, recent studies such as TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024) have attempted to


                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




transplant the knowledge of LoRA adapters across models by generating synthetic data (Wang et al.,
2023). While effective to some extent, this approach requires an additional discriminator model to
filter high-quality synthetic data, resulting in a relatively heavy pipeline. In parallel, Knowledge
Distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015; Azimi et al., 2024) has been widely explored as another
means of knowledge transfer; however, traditional KD typically operates within a teacher–student
framework at the logit or sequence level and requires access to training data close to the original,
in order to use the teacher’s distribution for supervising the student. In contrast, our approach
focuses on token-level selective transfer, offering a more fine-grained yet lightweight alternative
that enables efficient transplantation of LoRA adapters across diverse models for deployment.

Data synthesis with LLMs. Synthetic data generation with LLMs has attracted increasing atten-
tion as a means to reduce reliance on costly or inaccessible datasets (Wang et al., 2023; Kim et al.,
2025). Prior lines of research have leveraged synthetic data for purposes such as privacy preser-
vation (Bu et al., 2025), data augmentation (Kumar et al., 2021), and domain adaptation (Li et al.,
2023). In our framework, synthetic data serves as a core component, enabling the transfer of LoRA
adapters without access to the original training corpus, while simultaneously mitigating privacy con-
cerns and reducing the degree of dependency on external datasets. Moreover, since both queries and
labels are generated directly by the source expert model itself, synthetic data ultimately provides a
self-sufficient mechanism that fits to our objective of lightweight and effective knowledge transfer.

Selective token training. Recent studies (Lin et al., 2025; Gu et al., 2020) demonstrate that not
all tokens contribute equally to model training, motivating research on selective training strategies.
While such approaches have primarily been applied to accelerate optimization or reduce redundancy
(Yeongbin et al., 2024; Bal et al., 2025), our work innovatively extends this concept to the setting
of knowledge transfer. Specifically, our concept of excess scores (Eq. 2) is derived from this idea,
where the contrast between the source backbone and its LoRA adapter yields token-level judgments.
This enables T I T OK to transplant LoRA knowledge in a more focused and fine-grained manner,
highlighting the broader applicability of selective training beyond its original scope.

3     T I T OK : T RANSPLANTING L O RA THROUGH T OKEN -L EVEL K NOWLEDGE
In this section, we introduce T I T OK, a framework for LoRA Transplantation through Token-level
knowledge transfer (Fig. 1). The core idea of T I T OK is to transfer the knowledge from a source
model’s LoRA adapter into a target model’s LoRA adapter by training selectively on the informative
tokens within synthetic data. Specifically, the framework consists of three components: (1) Synthetic
data generation (Sec. 3.1), where the source expert model produces query–label pairs for target
task; (2) Excess score computation (Sec. 3.2), which calculates token-level importance using the
source model; and (3) Target model training with filtering (Sec. 3.3), which trains the target model
with newly initialized LoRA adapter on top-ranked samples and tokens. In addition, we propose
Excess score alignment (Sec. 3.4), an algorithm designed to apply T I T OK even when tokenizers of
the source and target models differ. The overall algorithm of T I T OK is presented in Alg. 1.

3.1   S YNTHETIC DATA GENERATION VIA LLM PROMPTING WITH FEW- SHOT DATA

Let Ms denote the source backbone LLM and As its LoRA adapter on target downstream task,
which forms the source expert model Ms + As . The target model, whose LoRA adapter At will be
trained, is denoted by Mt . Then, T I T OK first constructs a synthetic dataset Ds , similar to the idea of
TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024). This usage of synthetic data allows us to avoid keeping the whole
original dataset for the downstream task, and simultaneously let At learn the knowledge encoded
in the source adapter As . Unlike TransLoRA’s approach of using the untuned target model Mt to
generate synthetic data, we use the source expert model Ms + As to synthesize data (see empirical
comparison in Fig. 3). Concretely, Ms + As synthesizes both the query and the label within a
prompting-based data synthesis framework (Wang et al., 2023) (see details in Appendix P); given a
few-shot data of downstream task, it first generates a query q, and then produces the corresponding
label y conditioned on q. To encourage diversity, we apply ROUGE-L filtering together with dedu-
plication to all tasks, except for exceptional cases where such filtering is infeasible (more details are
in Appendix I). Consequently, the resulting synthetic dataset consists of query–label pairs:
                                          Ds = {(qj , yj )}N
                                                           j=1 .                                        (1)


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




In this way, Mt would be trained on the synthetic data Ds generated by the source expert model
Ms + As , thereby enabling knowledge transfer without relying on the entire original dataset.

3.2   T OKEN - WISE CONTRASTIVE EXCESS SCORE FROM SOURCE MODEL WITH L O RA

As described in Sec. 3.1, T I T OK relies on synthetic data, but synthetic data is often prone to
imperfections (Chen et al., 2024b); thus, sophisticated filtering is essential to retain high-quality
informative samples. TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024) tackles this challenge with a separate discrimi-
nator to filter useful queries, but this introduces the extra burden of training and maintaining an extra
model. In contrast, we propose a lightweight alternative that only utilizes the already trained source
model. Specifically, we use source model and its LoRA adapter to perform two complementary
roles: (1) the amateur role (Ms ) and (2) the expert role (Ms + As ). Then, the difference between
the two roles provides an implicit supervision signal where the task information is encoded.
Formally, let y = [y1 , ..., yL ] denote the synthesized response, where yi is a token of y corresponding
to the synthesized query q. Then, we define the excess score as:
                                      S(yi ) = Le (yi ) − La (yi ),                                  (2)
where the amateur and expert losses on token yi are defined as:
              La (yi ) = log PMs (yi | q, y< i),   Le (yi ) = log PMs +As (yi | q, y< i).            (3)
The excess score S(yi ) quantifies the knowledge discrepancy introduced by the LoRA adapter,
thereby identifying the tokens where the adapter provides a decisive contribution. Intuitively, if
the backbone model is uncertain about predicting a token but the LoRA-enhanced model assigns it
with high confidence, that token will thus obtain a large excess score. This implies that tokens with
higher S(yi ) correspond to positions where the LoRA adapter injects task-specific knowledge that
the backbone could not capture on its own. In this way, the excess score functions as a fine-grained
attribution signal, derived entirely from the internal behavior of the model itself, and guides training
toward the specific regions of data that are most enriched with the adapter’s knowledge.
While the excess score is motivated from an intuitive contrast between the backbone and its
LoRA-enhanced counterpart, it is also grounded in principled statistical theory. Theoretically, the
proposed token-wise contrastive excess score is connected to a token-level log-likelihood ratio
(LLR) between the source expert (backbone + LoRA) and the backbone. LLR is a robust metric
widely established in statistical testing (Li & Babu, 2019). For example, by the Neyman–Pearson
lemma (Neyman & Pearson, 1933), the likelihood ratio is known to be the optimal statistic for
identifying differences between two models. Therefore, high-LLR tokens are exactly the regions
where the adapter changes the predictive distribution, i.e., where task knowledge is injected. In
addition, from the perspective of standard knowledge distillation, tokens with nearly zero LLR
provide no additional teacher knowledge and offer no benefit for transfer. In contrast, high-LLR
tokens correspond to maximal teacher–student divergence, larger gradients, and higher information
contribution to the student. Therefore, emphasizing tokens with high LLR in particular naturally
focuses training on the precise positions where transferable knowledge is concentrated.

3.3   TARGET MODEL TRAINING WITH SAMPLE FILTERING AND TOKEN SELECTION

After the computation of excess scores S(yi ), the newly initialized LoRA adapter At for target
model Mt is trained using the synthetic samples (qj , yj ) ∈ Df with two-level filtering schemes.
First stage: Sample filtering. We begin by filtering the synthetic dataset Ds (Eq. 1) at the sample
level to remove less informative examples. For each synthetic sample, we compute the mean of the
excess scores S(yi ) across the tokens in y and retain only M samples with the highest values.
                                               1 X
                                      S̄j =              S(yi ).                                (4)
                                              |yj | y ∈y
                                                       i   j


Let Df be the set of the M samples in Ds with the largest S̄j :
                                           
                             Df = TopM (qj , yj ) ∈ Ds : S̄j .                                       (5)
Through this step, the synthetic data undergoes a filtering process, ensuring that subsequent training
is concentrated specifically on the remaining examples in Df with richer knowledge signals.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Algorithm 1: T I T OK: Transplanting LoRA through Token-Level Knowledge
Input: source expert Ms + As , target Mt , parameters N, M, k%
Output: trained target LoRA At
1. Construct synthetic dataset Ds = {(qj , yj )}N
                                                j=1 with Ms + As
2. for (qj , yj ) ∈ Ds do
     Compute token excess scores S(yi ) = Le (yi ) − La (yi )
     Calculate mean score S̄j = |y1j | yi ∈yj S(yi )
                                      P

3. Select top-M samples by S̄j to form Df
4. for (qj , yj ) ∈ Df do
     Rank tokens by S(yi ) and keep top-k%, represented by mask Ik% (yi )
5. if tokenizer(Ms ) ̸= tokenizer(Mt ) then
                  (s)            (t)
     Align masks Ik% (yi ) → Ik% (yi )
                                                  X        X
6. Train At on Mt with masked loss LTiTok =                         Ik% (yi ) · Lt (yi )
                                              (qj ,yj )∈Df yi ∈yj
return At


Second stage: Token selection. Next, we consider token selection; that is, At does not learn from
all tokens within the retained samples. Instead, it focuses only on those prioritized by the excess
scores S(yi ), which are identified as most important for knowledge transfer. To achieve this, we
select the top k% of tokens ranked by their excess scores using the indicator Ik% (yi ):
                                                         
                                       1, if rankyj S(yi ) ≤ ⌊k% · |yj |⌋,
                         Ik% (yi ) =                                                            (6)
                                       0, otherwise,
where |yj | denotes the number of tokens in yj , and rankyj (S(yi )) indicates the rank of S(yi ) among
the tokens of that response. Based on this selection, the training objective for At is defined as
                                          X        X
                             LTiTok =                   Ik% (yi ) · Lt (yi ),                        (7)
                                         (qj ,yj )∈Df yi ∈yj

where Lt (yi ) is the negative log-likelihood loss assigned by Mt + At on token yi (only At is
learnable). By training only on these filtered tokens (Eq. 7), T I T OK enables At to efficiently acquire
the source LoRA’s knowledge without access to the original training data or any external models.

3.4     E XCESS SCORE ALIGNMENT ACROSS DIFFERENT TOKENIZERS

In cases of transfer between models with different tokenizers, a direct mapping of token-level
signals is not possible, given that the source and target models may segment texts differently. To
address this, we introduce a simple yet robust tokenizer alignment algorithm that propagates token
masks (Eq. 6) from the source token sequence y(s) to the target token sequence y(t) . The algorithm
first aligns token sequences using dual pointers that incrementally decode and match text spans.
Masks are then propagated using the following four rules: (1) direct copy for one-to-one mappings,
(2) replication for one-to-many, (3) averaging for many-to-one, and (4) averaging with replication
for many-to-many. Finally, a top-k% selection step retains the most confident target tokens. This
process ensures consistent supervision across tokenizers, enabling reliable transfer even when
models tokenize text differently. The conceptual illustration of this procedure is presented in Fig.4.

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we present our experimental results to answer the following research questions:
    • RQ1: Can T I T OK efficiently transfer knowledge of LoRA in various scenarios? (Table 1)
    • RQ2: What is the contribution of each component in T I T OK? (Table 2)
    • RQ3: How sensitive is token-level selective transfer to the selection ratio? (Figure 2)
    • RQ4: How does the choice of model to synthesize query affect the performance? (Figure 3)
    • RQ5: Can T I T OK transfer knowledge using data from a different or unrelated domain? (Table 4)


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




4.1    E XPERIMENTAL SETUPS

Models. We mainly present our knowledge transfer experiments using models from the Mistral
and Llama families. Specifically, we designed the following LoRA transfer (source → target) setups.
(1) Mistral-7B-Inst-v0.32 → Mistral-7B-Inst-v0.3: the basic transfer setup, (2) Mistral-7B-Inst-v0.3
→ Llama-3.1-8B-Inst3 : the different-family model transfer setup, (3) Llama-3.2-3B-Inst4 →
Llama-3.1-8B-Inst: the different-size model transfer setup, and (4) Llama-2-7b-chat-hf5 → Llama-
3.1-8B-Inst: the different-version model transfer setup. These setups are intended to test whether a
smaller model can effectively transfer knowledge to a larger one, and to explore whether a relatively
weaker model can still influence a newer, stronger model. These various setups realistically reflect
how LLMs develop today, where various models are released and newer, improved versions keep
emerging. Model names are abbreviated for clarity and are used consistently in all tables and
figures: 1) “Mistral 7B” = Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3, 2) “Llama3 8B” = Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, 3)
“Llama3 3B” = Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct, 4) “Llama2 7B” = Llama-2-7b-chat-hf.

Baselines. To demonstrate the effectiveness of T I T OK, we compare it against three baselines: (i)
Vanilla, the target base model without any fine-tuning; (ii) KD(+MinED), knowledge distillation
(KD) from source expert model (Hinton et al., 2015). When the source and target models use dif-
ferent tokenizers, the original KD is not applicable. In this case, we use Minimum-Edit-Distance
(MinED) tokenizer alignment (Wan et al., 2024), which aligns both token sequences and vocabulary
distributions via dynamic-programming sequence alignment for near matches (e.g., “gets” ↔ “get”)
and by mapping probability mass to nearest edit-distance neighbors (e.g., “immediately” ↔ “imme-
diate”). We use the synthesized data by TransLoRA as the training data for KD (+MinED) ; and (iii)
TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024), a prior method in which the vanilla target model synthesizes the
queries, while the source model with its LoRA adapter generates the corresponding synthetic labels.
A discriminator is then employed to filter the synthetic data for training the target LoRA adapter.

Datasets. Following prior work in TransLoRA, we first conduct experiments on two represen-
tative benchmarks: (1) Big-Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022) and (2) Massive Multitask
Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al., 2021). BBH consists of 27 challenging rea-
soning tasks structured as multiple choice or short answer questions, designed to test compositional
generalization and advanced problem solving abilities of a Language Model. Meanwhile, MMLU
covers 57 tasks across diverse academic subjects, presented in multiple choice format to evaluate
broad knowledge and reasoning skills of a model. As both benchmarks provide only test sets, we
construct 90%/10% train-evaluation splits. For BBH, we use the full dataset, whereas for MMLU,
we randomly sample 100 instances of the dataset for each task before applying the 90%/10% split.
To extend our approach to personalization and text generation, we additionally conduct experiments
on LaMP benchmark (Salemi et al., 2024), focusing exclusively on its generation tasks. In particular,
we experiment with (3) News Headline Generation (LaMP 4) and (4) Scholarly Title Generation
(LaMP 5), as they are the only text generation tasks that are both accessible and reliably evaluable.
The remaining LaMP tasks are excluded, given that LaMP 1,2,3 are discriminative, and LaMP 6,7
lack gold labels. For LaMP tasks, the source expert model Ms + As is trained on data from the 30
users with the longest activity histories. From each user, we use 200 data points for training and 50
data points for validation, a design choice intended to conduct a more rigorous and robust evaluation.
In total, each LaMP task contains 6,000 training examples and 1,500 evaluation examples.
To assess performance on the BBH and MMLU, we measure the average accuracy using the
LM-Eval Harness (Gao et al., 2024). Following the setup used in TransLoRA (Wang et al., 2024),
all tasks are conducted in a zero-shot setting. Meanwhile, for the LaMP tasks, we adopt ROUGE-1
and ROUGE-L scores as evaluation metrics, following the benchmark’s primary evaluation metrics.

Implementation details. When training both the source and target models, we use a learning rate
of 5 × 10−5 , train for 2 epochs with a batch size of 4, and apply LoRA with rank r = 8, scaling
factor α = 8, and dropout 0.05. Optimization is performed using AdamW with weight decay
   2
     https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
   3
     https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
   4
     https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct
   5
     https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 1: Main results. Experiments on BBH, MMLU, News Headline and Scholarly Title Genera-
tion tasks under four transfer settings. Reasoning tasks (BBH, MMLU) are evaluated via LM-Eval
Harness, and personalization tasks (News Headline, Scholarly Title Generation) via ROUGE-1/L.
Zero-shot evaluations are reported as the mean across 3 random seeds. Best scores are in bold.

                                   BBH     MMLU          News Headline            Scholarly Title
 Transfer        Method
                                   Acc.    Acc.        ROUGE-1   ROUGE-L      ROUGE-1     ROUGE-L
                 Vanilla           0.397   0.557        0.117      0.101        0.381        0.311
  Mistral 7B     KD (+MinED)       0.417   0.560        0.117      0.104        0.385        0.310
 → Mistral 7B    TransLoRA         0.416   0.534        0.156      0.137        0.447        0.382
                 T I T OK (ours)   0.424   0.561        0.161      0.143        0.473        0.413
                 Vanilla           0.469   0.469        0.125      0.110        0.444        0.378
  Mistral 7B     KD (+MinED)       0.475   0.482        0.127      0.112        0.454        0.387
 → Llama3 8B     TransLoRA         0.473   0.473        0.126      0.110        0.461        0.397
                 T I T OK (ours)   0.484   0.485        0.139      0.123        0.464        0.403
                 Vanilla           0.469   0.469        0.125      0.110        0.444        0.378
  Llama3 3B      KD (+MinED)       0.474   0.477        0.125      0.110        0.449        0.383
 → Llama3 8B     TransLoRA         0.471   0.467        0.122      0.108        0.454        0.387
                 T I T OK (ours)   0.496   0.478        0.127      0.113        0.456        0.392
                 Vanilla           0.469   0.469        0.125      0.110        0.444        0.378
  Llama2 7B      KD (+MinED)       0.473   0.476        0.125      0.110        0.449        0.382
 → Llama3 8B     TransLoRA         0.472   0.468        0.123      0.109        0.457        0.394
                 T I T OK (ours)   0.488   0.477        0.138      0.120        0.461        0.403


1 × 10−2 , together with a linear learning rate schedule and a warmup ratio of 0.1. For synthetic
data generation, we provide five samples from the original training data as few-shot exemplars,
and apply top-p sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) to generate both queries and labels, with sampling
hyperparameters tuned individually for each task. To further encourage diversity, we apply ROUGE-
L filtering with a threshold of 0.7 and deduplication to remove redundant queries, following Wang
et al. (2023). For tasks where ROUGE-based filtering is infeasible, we apply only deduplication (see
Appendix I). For the initial synthetic pool, we generate 2M synthetic samples and, after filtering
with token-wise contrastive excess scores, retain the top M , where M equals the source training set
size (see Appendix H). For token selection, the selection ratio k% is fixed at 70% across all tasks
and transfer settings, except for the Llama3 3B → Llama3 8B transfer setting, where we find that
k% = 30% consistently yields the best performance. During inference in the evaluation stage, we
adopt greedy decoding to ensure fully deterministic and reproducible inference results.

4.2   M AIN RESULTS

Table 1 summarizes the experimental results on BBH, MMLU, and LaMP (News Headline and
Scholarly Title generation) tasks across four transfer settings. First, we observe that transfer within
the same model family is highly effective; when transplanting the LoRA adapter trained on the
Mistral 7B into a fresh instance of the same model, T I T OK consistently surpasses all baselines. In
particular, T I T OK improves the vanilla model by 23.94% on average across all tasks, and further
outperforms the KD and TransLoRA baselines by 21.95% and 4.75%, respectively. Taken together,
the findings show that, as a first step, transfer within the same family is reliably successful.
Beyond same family transfer, we also find that T I T OK is highly effective in cross-model transfer
settings. For example, when transferring from Mistral 7B to Llama 8B, T I T OK delivers an average
improvement across all tasks of 6.79% over the vanilla model, while outperforming KD by 4.69%
and TransLoRA by 4.86%. This highlights that T I T OK is not confined to intra-family knowledge
transfer, but can successfully bridge across architectures. In the case of Llama3 3B to Llama3
8B, T I T OK yields average gains of 3.07% against vanilla, 2.18% against KD, and 3.02% against
TransLoRA. These results suggest that T I T OK scales effectively with model size, making it useful
when moving from lightweight to larger models without losing efficiency. Finally, when transferring
from Llama2 7B to Llama3 8B, T I T OK performs average advantages of 5.95% over vanilla, 5.17%
over KD, and 5.13% over TransLoRA. This indicates that T I T OK adapts robustly even across differ-
ent model versions, implying practical relevance when models are upgraded in real-world pipelines.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 2: Ablation study. ”Sample filtering” uses the mean token-wise contrastive excess score
to remove uninformative examples, while “Token selection” further refines the retained data by
selectively keeping only the most informative tokens within each sample. Without sample filtering,
data are randomly sampled. Results are reported as accuracy (Acc.) for BBH and MMLU, averaged
across tasks. Meanwhile, we report ROUGE-1 (R-1) and ROUGE-L (R-L) for LaMP tasks.

                    Settings                 BBH         MMLU       News Headline        Scholarly Title
      Sample filtering   Token selection     Acc.        Acc.        R-1      R-L        R-1      R-L
             ✗                  ✗            0.458       0.485      0.133     0.117      0.456    0.393
             ✗                  ✓            0.463       0.496      0.137     0.121      0.460    0.397
             ✓                  ✗            0.470       0.500      0.139     0.122      0.460    0.397
             ✓                  ✓            0.483       0.501      0.142     0.125      0.464    0.403


Table 3: Excess-score token subgroup analysis. Effect of token subgroup selection in Mistral 7B
→ Llama3 8B transfer. The top 20% excess-score tokens yield the best performance on BBH.

                    Transfer                    Method           Subgroup        Acc.
                                                Vanilla          –               0.469
                                                                 top 20%         0.482
                    Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B
                                                T I T OK         bottom 20%      0.468
                                                                 random 20%      0.476



Collectively, these results provide strong evidence that T I T OK not only excels in transfers within
the same model family, but also demonstrates broad effectiveness in cross-model transfers, thereby
highlighting its robustness across a wide spectrum of model scales, versions, and families.

4.3   A DDITIONAL ANALYSES

In the following sections, we present additional analyses to showcase the effectiveness of T I T OK.
Unlike the main table which reports the average of three random seeds to ensure statistical stability,
the empirical results discussed in the subsequent sections are reported using a single, fixed seed.

Ablation study. To validate the contribution of each component in our framework, we conduct
additional experiments by selectively excluding the sample filtering and token selection mechanisms
in Sec. 3.3. We report the average performance scores across all four transfer settings, and the results
are presented in Table 2. When sample filtering is not applied (1st and 2nd rows), the training data
for the target model is randomly sampled from the full synthetic dataset. Under this setting, applying
only token selection (2nd row) performs noticeably better than the purely random baseline. This
demonstrates the effectiveness of our token selection approach and empirically confirms that token-
wise contrastive excess reliably identifies and selects the most informative tokens. Similarly, when
only sample filtering is applied (1st and 3rd rows), the results improve over pure random sampling,
indicating that selecting high-quality data is essential. This finding further implies that incorporat-
ing an effective filtering mechanism for synthetic data is essential. In our framework, token-wise
contrastive excess serves this role by reliably selecting samples with richer and more informative
signals, as demonstrated clearly by the empirical results. Finally, the results show that combining
both stages (4th row) achieves the best performance, confirming their complementary roles in
filtering high-quality examples and selecting informative tokens for effective knowledge transfer.
Next, we also evaluate whether high excess-score tokens indeed carry concentrated transferable
knowledge. We verify this empirically by contrasting token subgroups of the top 20%, bottom 20%,
and random 20% on BBH in the Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer setting. To prevent unintentional
overlap across groups and to extract the most informative region, we employ a comparatively low
20% threshold for this analysis. The results are presented in Table 3. Analytically, the empirical
results show that the top 20% produces the best transfer performance, validating tat tokens with
high token-wise contrastive excess scores indeed contain concentrated task knowledge.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




           (a) BBH (accuracy)                  (b) BBH (accuracy)              (c) News Headline (ROUGE-L)
           Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B           Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B                 Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B

Figure 2: Representative performance trends across k%. Among the three graphs, two come
from the same task (BBH), while two share the same transfer setting (Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B).

Interestingly, we observe that truly important tokens are consistently selected regardless of the
expert’s model. For example, for BBH datasets, Mistral 7B and Llama2 7B experts agree on
59.76% of the chosen tokens even when we limit the selection to a small top 20% subset to prevent
trivial overlap. This implies that a token will continue to be recognized across models if it is truly
significant for the task, and it can be effectively identified by our token-wise contrastive excess score.

Effect of token selection ratio. We now proceed to explore the impact of token selection ratios
(k%) in our framework. Fig. 2 presents three representative curves: one task (BBH) under two
transfer settings, and another task (News Headline Generation) under the same transfer setting for
comparison. For BBH with the same backbone on source and target (Mistral 7B→Mistral 7B), a
moderate token selection ratio of 30-70% yields the best results. Very low ratios (10-20%) lead
to underfitting, while a 100% ratio is ineffective as it applies no filtering at all. Interestingly, in a
weak-to-strong transfer (Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B) for the same BBH task, performance improves
as k% decreases. This suggests that selecting only the tokens with the highest excess loss effectively
filters out the majority of noisy regions where the weaker model is uncertain. By discarding the ma-
jority of tokens where the weaker model lacks confidence, T I T OK can significantly reduce negative
transfer. This trend, however, reverses for the News Headline Generation task under the same weak-
to-strong transfer setting. For this task, a larger k% is generally better, potentially because even
a weaker model can provide valuable lexical and stylistic cues that are useful for personalization.
Consequently, unlike reasoning-focused tasks such as BBH, which are sensitive to noisy supervi-
sion, personalization tasks like News Headline Generation benefit more broadly from the source
model’s outputs, even when the source model is relatively weaker than the target model.

Impact of query generation model. We now ex-
amine how the choice of query generation model in-
fluences performance. Practically, synthetic queries
can be generated either by the source model or by
the target model, with the latter being the approach
originally adopted in TransLoRA’s pipeline (Wang
et al., 2024). Figure 3 compares these two op-
tions across different transfer settings, with the re-
ported scores averaged over all BBH tasks. No-
tably, we observe that using the source expert model
(source backbone + LoRA) for query generation
generally yields stronger performance than using Figure 3: Impact of query source. Across
the target model. One possible explanation is that transfer settings, using the source expert
when synthetic data is generated by the same model, model to synthesize query generally yields
they remain closer to its training distribution. This better performance. The accuracy averaged
alignment between queries and labels likely pro- over all BBH tasks are reported.
vides more coherent supervision, thereby facilitat-
ing more effective transfer. Ultimately, these findings empirically justify our design choice to use
the source model as both the query and label generator, instead of using the target model.



                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Effectiveness of transfer through exter- Table 4: Transfer using external data. ROUGE-1 (R-
nal data source. We further examine 1) and ROUGE-L (R-L) on News Headline and Schol-
whether T I T OK can transfer knowledge arly Title Generation under three data settings for Mis-
effectively in cases where synthetic data tral 7B→Mistral 7B: (1) other-user, (2) mixed-user, (3)
is not preferred, and thus external data cross-task. Best scores are highlighted in bold.
is used as an alternative. To this end,
we evaluate three alternative settings                                        News Headline Scholarly Title
on LaMP tasks for Mistral 7B→Mistral             Data Setting Method
                                                                               R-1    R-L    R-1     R-L
7B transfer setup: (1) using data from
a randomly chosen different user, (2)                         Vanilla         0.117  0.101  0.381 0.311
                                                 Other-user   KD              0.127  0.113  0.405 0.333
mixing data from multiple users, and                          T I T OK (ours) 0.151  0.136  0.481 0.425
(3) transferring across tasks, where data
of Scholarly Title Generation is used                         Vanilla         0.117  0.101  0.381 0.311
                                                 Mixed-user   MinED           0.124  0.110  0.409 0.337
to train on News Headline Generation                          T I T OK (ours) 0.151  0.137  0.480 0.422
and vice versa (i.e., out-of-distribution
scenario). The results are presented in                       Vanilla         0.117  0.101  0.381 0.311
                                                 Cross-task   MinED           0.118  0.106  0.403 0.331
Table 4. Remarkably, T I T OK consistently                    T I T OK (ours) 0.133  0.120  0.450 0.383
outperforms all baselines across these
heterogeneous external settings. These findings demonstrate that T I T OK is not restricted to syn-
thetic data scenarios, but can also adapt effectively under external or user-provided data conditions.
This highlights the flexibility of T I T OK for practical deployment in diverse real-world application
scenarios and further underscores its adaptability across different data conditions, as it is effective
even when external data is used as an alternative to synthetic data.


Transfer under cross-architecture and large- Table 5: Larger scale transfer settings.
scale. We additionally conduct experiments on BBH evaluation results for cross-architecture
larger-scale models and architectures to reinforce and large-scale model transfers.
T I T OK’s effectiveness. Due to the large model       Transfer Setting    Method          Acc.
size, all experiments in this section are evaluated
                                                       Mistral 7B          Vanilla         0.454
on BBH using 4-bit quantization. As shown in           → Mixtral-8×7B6 T I T OK (k=70%) 0.463
Table 5, T I T OK successfully transfers token-level
                                                       Llama-3.3-70B       Vanilla         0.593
knowledge in both settings. Specifically, cross-       → Llama-3.3-70B7 T I T OK (k=70%) 0.621
architecture transfer from a dense model (Mistral
7B) to a mixture-of-experts (MoE) model yields a 1.98% improvement over the target baseline,
while scaling up to the 70B transfer setting, achieves a 4.72% gain. These results confirm that
T I T OK generalizes robustly across both complex MoE architectures and massive model scales.


5       C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose T I T OK, a novel and efficient framework that transfers LoRA knowledge
from a source model to a target model by training only on a selectively chosen set of highly
informative tokens. At its core, T I T OK strategically leverages token-level signals to distill
task-relevant information from the source adapter, rather than indiscriminately relying on the entire
token sequence. With this simple yet effective design, T I T OK consistently surpasses baselines in
various transfer settings, providing a practical solution for efficient knowledge transfer.


Limitations and Future Work While T I T OK has shown clear advantages, opportunities remain
to refine the framework. First, generating synthetic data still requires a few seed examples. Never-
theless, this reliance is modest, as we avoid using full datasets. In addition, our experiments show
external data serves as an effective alternative, reinforcing the flexibility of T I T OK. Regarding to-
ken selection, while T I T OK currently relies on a simple yet highly effective fixed threshold for token
selection, future work could explore adaptive thresholding strategies to further enhance efficiency.

    6
        https://huggingface.co/mistralai/Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1
    7
        https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct


                                                    10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




E THICS S TATEMENT
We conduct this research in full accordance with established ethical standards. For our experiments
we rely exclusively on publicly available datasets such as LaMP, MMLU, and BBH and use them
strictly in accordance with their intended purpose for academic research. For the LaMP tasks, which
involve user data, our T I T OK framework aligns with ethical considerations by minimizing data
dependence. It does not store or expose raw user data and only updates a small set of task and
user-specific parameters. This helps safeguard privacy while enabling efficient knowledge transfer.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide a comprehensive description of our implementation in Section 4, including pipeline con-
figurations, hyperparameters, models, datasets, and evaluation metrics. The source code of T I T OK
is publicly available at https://github.com/NaughtyMaltiz16/TiTok.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by Institute for Information & communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2020-
II201361, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (Yonsei University); No. RS-2025-
25442405, Development of a Self-Learning World Model-Based AGI System for Hyperspectral
Imaging).

R EFERENCES
Rambod Azimi, Rishav Rishav, Marek Teichmann, and Samira Ebrahimi Kahou. Kd-lora: A
  hybrid approach to efficient fine-tuning with lora and knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2410.20777, 2024.
Melis Ilayda Bal, Volkan Cevher, and Michael Muehlebach. Eslm: Risk-averse selective language
 modeling for efficient pretraining, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19893.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz
  Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
  Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
Hyungjune Bu, Chanjoo Jung, Minjae Kang, and Jaehyung Kim. Personalized llm decoding via
  contrasting personal preference, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12109.
Lichang Chen, Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Kalpa Gunaratna, Vikas Yadav, Zheng Tang, Vijay
  Srinivasan, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, and Hongxia Jin. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with
  fewer data, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08701.
Lichang Chen, Shiyang Li, Jun Yan, Hai Wang, Kalpa Gunaratna, Vikas Yadav, Zheng Tang, Vijay
  Srinivasan, Tianyi Zhou, Heng Huang, et al. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with fewer data.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024b.
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
  of quantized llms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Fos-
  ter, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
  nighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang
  Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. The language model
  evaluation harness, 07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/12608602.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Yuxian Gu, Zhengyan Zhang, Xiaozhi Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Train no evil: Se-
  lective masking for task-guided pre-training. In Bonnie Webber, Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and
  Yang Liu (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), pp. 6966–6974, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
  Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.566. URL https://aclanthology.org/
  2020.emnlp-main.566/.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Ja-
  cob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, An-
  drea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang,
  and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.
Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Xiang Yue, Vijay Viswanathan, Seongyun Lee, Yizhong Wang, Kiril
  Gashteovski, Carolin Lawrence, Sean Welleck, and Graham Neubig. Evaluating language models
  as synthetic data generators. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
  (ACL), 2025.
Varun Kumar, Ashutosh Choudhary, and Eunah Cho. Data augmentation using pre-trained trans-
  former models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02245.
J. Li and S. Babu. A Graduate Course on Statistical Inference. Springer, 2019.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.00190, 2021.
Zhuoyan Li, Hangxiao Zhu, Zhuoran Lu, and Ming Yin. Synthetic data generation with large lan-
  guage models for text classification: Potential and limitations, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2310.07849.
Zhenghao Lin, Zhibin Gou, Yeyun Gong, Xiao Liu, Yelong Shen, Ruochen Xu, Chen Lin, Yujiu
  Yang, Jian Jiao, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Rho-1: Not all tokens are what you need, 2025.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.07965.
He Liu, Yikai Wang, Huaping Liu, Fuchun Sun, and Anbang Yao. Small scale data-free knowledge
  distillation. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Gaurav Kumar Nayak, Konda Reddy Mopuri, Vaisakh Shaj, Venkatesh Babu Radhakrishnan, and
  Anirban Chakraborty. Zero-shot knowledge distillation in deep networks. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Jerzy Neyman and Egon S. Pearson. On the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical hy-
   potheses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 231:289–337,
   1933.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
  cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red
  Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Moham-
  mad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher
  Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
  man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann,


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




  Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis,
  Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
  Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux,
  Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila
  Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
  Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gib-
  son, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan
  Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hal-
  lacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan
  Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin Hu,
  Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
  Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
  mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook
  Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel
  Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen
  Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel
  Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez,
  Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv
  Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney,
  Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick,
  Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
  Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Ra-
  jeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe,
  Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel
  Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe
  de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny,
  Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
  Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra
  Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders,
  Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Sel-
  sam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor,
  Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky,
  Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Pre-
  ston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
  jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan
  Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng,
  Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Work-
  man, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming
  Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers, Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao
  Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774.
Baptiste Rozière, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi
  Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, Jérémy Rapin, Artyom Kozhevnikov, Ivan Ev-
  timov, Joanna Bitton, Manish Bhatt, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Aaron Grattafiori, Wenhan Xiong,
  Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Faisal Azhar, Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Nicolas Usunier,
  Thomas Scialom, and Gabriel Synnaeve. Code llama: Open foundation models for code, 2024.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950.
Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. Lamp: When large lan-
  guage models meet personalization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11406.
Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Scales, Nathanael Schärli, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yi Tay, Hyung Won Chung,
 Aakanksha Chowdhery, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Denny Zhou, and Jason Wei. Challenging big-
 bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2210.09261.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1706.03762.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Fanqi Wan, Xinting Huang, Deng Cai, Xiaojun Quan, Wei Bi, and Shuming Shi. Knowledge fusion
  of large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.10491.
Runqian Wang, Soumya Ghosh, David Cox, Diego Antognini, Aude Oliva, Rogerio Feris, and
  Leonid Karlinsky. Trans-lora: towards data-free transferable parameter efficient finetuning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and
  Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions.
  In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2023.
Haoyi Xiong, Jiang Bian, Yuchen Li, Xuhong Li, Mengnan Du, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and
  Sumi Helal. When search engine services meet large language models: Visions and challenges,
  2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00128.
Seo Yeongbin, Dongha Lee, and Jinyoung Yeo. Train-attention: Meta-learning where to focus in
  continual knowledge learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:58284–
  58308, 2024.




                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                                     select Top k% tokens

                   But    seek         fir st       his    kingdom       and his      right eous ness . . .

                     1         0        1 1           0        1           0      1     1     0     1




                             1    0     1 1    0      1     0     0    1    0                                  1
           Source model     But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness



                            But seek first                his kingdom and his righteousness
           Target model


                          one to one            many to one         one to many                   many to many
                           1/1=1                (1+1)/ 2 = 1          1/1=1                        2 / 3 = 0.667


                             1    0      1     0    1 1     0     0    0.667 0.667
                            But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness


                                                                          keep Top k% tokens




                                                         Target model (+ LoRA )
                                                    trains on aligned top k% tokens



Figure 4: Overview of T I T OK’s tokenizer alignment algorithm. The algorithm handles cases
where the source and target models use different tokenizers. The binary mask scores assigned by
the source model are averaged within aligned spans and propagated to target tokens, producing
fractional scores that guide top-k% token selection for training the target model’s LoRA adapter.


A    T OKENIZER A LIGNMENT A LGORITHM

When the source and target models use different tokenizers, direct token-level transfer is not pos-
sible. To address this, we implement a dual-pointer alignment procedure. The algorithm maintains
two pointers, one for the source tokens and one for the target tokens. At each step, the source pointer
advances by one token, accumulating a decoded segment, while the target pointer incrementally ex-
tends its own segment until the normalized texts match. Once a match is found, the corresponding
spans are recorded as an alignment, and the target pointer jumps forward to that position. After
alignment, we apply masking rules to propagate the source binary mask scores (values that indicate
whether a token should be kept or discarded) to the target tokens. Specifically:

     1) One-to-One: binary mask score is directly copied.
     2) One-to-Many: score is replicated across all aligned target tokens.
     3) Many-to-One: averaged scores of multiple source tokens are assigned to the target token.
     4) Many-to-Many: the averaged score of the source tokens is assigned to the corresponding
        aligned target tokens.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 6: Average alignment percentage breakdown across BBH and News Headline tasks in the
Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer setting.

                                                BBH           News Headline
                            exceptions            0%               0%
                            many to many       46.18%             5.00%
                            many to one         3.47%            17.45%
                            one to many         0.01%             0.01%
                            one to one         50.33%            77.52%

 Table 7: Effect of token alignment cases in the Mistral-7B → Llama-3 8B transfer experiments.

                                                                  BBH         News Headline
                                                                  Acc.        R-1      R-L
                                           Vanilla                0.469       0.125   0.110
            Mistral-7B → Llama-3 8B        One to one only        0.472       0.138   0.120
                                           T I T OK (k=70%)       0.482       0.160   0.142


This process yields fractional mask scores that capture the relative importance of each target token.
Finally, we keep only the top-k% of tokens according to these scores, producing a final binary
selection mask over the target tokens that preserves the most informative regions while discarding
less relevant ones. An overview of this tokenizer alignment algorithm is presented in Figure 4.
Robustness of the algorithm. The algorithm is conceptually error-free since it simply performs
a deterministic mapping between two tokenizers on the exact same text sequence. Since both to-
kenizations correspond to the identical underlying character string, the mapping cannot introduce
semantic errors; every token in both tokenizers is defined over non-overlapping spans of the same
text, and these spans align uniquely. For instance, in the Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer setting
on BBH and News Headline benchmarks, 100% of tokens are aligned, and there are no exception
cases as shown in Table 6, confirming that alignment errors do not occur in practice.
Furthermore, we additionally construct a degraded setting in which we keep only the one-to-one
aligned token pairs and discard all other alignment cases. We perform the experiment in the Mistral
7B → Llama3 8B transfer setting on BBH and News Headline tasks, and the full results are presented
in Table 7. From these empirical results, we can observe that using all the full alignment cases
outperforms using one-to-one token pairs only. This implies that the many-to-one, one-to-many,
and many-to-many alignments are also correctly aligned, as including them yields the best results.
Together, these results confirm that our alignment method is both accurate and robust.

B     U SAGE OF AI A SSISTANTS
AI assistants are minimally used in this work, restricted solely to language refinement, such as
grammar correction, punctuation, and sentence structure. All research ideas, methodologies, and
analyses are the original contributions of the authors. Thus, the use of AI is confined to editorial
support and did not influence the originality or intellectual contributions of the work.

C     D ETAILS OF DATASETS
C.1   B IG -B ENCH H ARD (BBH)

Big-Bench Hard (BBH) (Suzgun et al., 2022) is designed as a rigorous benchmark for evaluat-
ing model performance on challenging reasoning problems, including multi-step logical reasoning,
symbolic manipulation, and commonsense inference. The tasks are formatted as multiple choice
questions. Since BBH is originally a test-only benchmark, we split 90% of the data for training the
source expert model and reserved 10% for evaluation. The 27 BBH tasks are categorized in Table 8.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




C.2   M ASSIVE M ULTITASK L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING (MMLU)

Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) (Hendrycks et al., 2021) is a comprehensive
benchmark for evaluating model performance across a broad range of knowledge intensive tasks.
The benchmark consists of multiple choice questions and, similarly to BBH, we also split the 100
randomly sampled test-only instances into 90%/10%. All the 57 subtasks are categorized in Table 9.

                   Table 8: Categorization of the 27 Big-Bench Hard (BBH) tasks.

 Category                     Tasks
 Logical Reasoning            boolean expressions, causal judgement, date understanding,
                              disambiguation qa, dyck languages, formal fallacies,
                              logical deduction three objects, logical deduction five objects,
                              logical deduction seven objects, temporal sequences,
                              tracking shuffled objects three objects, tracking shuffled objects five objects,
                              tracking shuffled objects seven objects, web of lies
 Linguistic                   hyperbaton, ruin names, salient translation error detection, snarks,
                              word sorting
 Mathematical / Symbolic      geometric shapes, multistep arithmetic two, object counting,
                              reasoning about colored objects
 Applied / Knowledge          movie recommendation, navigate, penguins in a table, sports understanding

                           Table 9: Categorization of the 57 MMLU tasks.

 Category                     Tasks
 STEM                         abstract algebra, anatomy, astronomy, college biology, college chemistry,
                              college computer science, college mathematics, college medicine,
                              college physics, computer security, conceptual physics,
                              electrical engineering, elementary mathematics, formal logic,
                              high school biology, high school chemistry, high school computer science,
                              high school mathematics, high school physics, high school statistics,
                              machine learning, medical genetics, nutrition, professional medicine,
                              professional psychology, virology, clinical knowledge, human aging,
                              human sexuality
 Humanities                   business ethics, formal fallacies, jurisprudence, logical fallacies, philosophy,
                              prehistory, world religions, moral disputes, moral scenarios, professional law,
                              professional accounting, high school world history, high school us history,
                              high school european history, global facts, security studies
 Social Sciences              econometrics, high school macroeconomics, high school microeconomics,
                              management, marketing, public relations, sociology, us foreign policy,
                              high school geography, high school government and politics
 Other                        miscellaneous, global facts


C.3   L A MP TASKS

We utilize the LaMP benchmark to evaluate whether T I T OK is also effective in the personaliza-
tion setting. Among the LaMP tasks, we focus on the two text generation tasks that are suitable,
accessible, and evaluable in our setting:
 • News Headline Generation (LaMP 4). Given an author profile consisting of previously written
   headlines, the model is asked to generate a headline for a news article. The task evaluates if the
   model can adapt its output to reflect the author’s characteristic style in journalistic writing.

 • Scholarly Title Generation (LaMP 5). Using an author profile built from prior titles of aca-
   demic publications, the model generates a title for a new given abstract. The task assesses the
   model’s ability to capture and reproduce distinctive conventions of academic writing.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




D     BASELINE D ETAILS

To evaluate the effectiveness of T I T OK, we compare against several baselines as follows:



D.1    VANILLA

The vanilla baseline corresponds to the standard target base model without any additional training or
knowledge transfer from the source model. This setup reflects the performance of the target model
in its raw initialized state and serves as a lower bound for evaluating transfer methods. Intuitively,
achieving performance that surpasses this baseline provides clear evidence that the target model has
successfully acquired and internalized knowledge transferred from the source model.



D.2    K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION (KD) (+M IN ED)

The knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015; Azimi et al., 2024) baseline trains the student
model to mimic the teacher model’s output distribution. Specifically, the loss is a weighted sum of
the cross entropy objective and the KL divergence between the teacher and student distributions. In
our setup, the KD experiments are conducted using the TransLoRA filtered synthetic datasets.
For cases where the source and target models use mismatched tokenizers when performing KD,
we apply the Minimal Edit Distance (MinED) alignment method (Wan et al., 2024). In particular,
MinED matches tokens across different vocabularies by minimizing the number of character
level edits. For example, it can align “get” with “gets,” “color” with “colour,” or “analysis” with
“analyses.” This tokenizer alignment approach avoids degeneracy issues in token alignment when
conducting KD, though it is different from our dual-pointer based alignment algorithm.



D.3    T RANS L O RA

The TransLoRA baseline (Wang et al., 2024) transfers LoRA knowledge by generating synthetic
data. In this method, the vanilla target model synthesizes queries, and the source model with its
LoRA adapter provides the corresponding labels. Subsequently, a discriminator, separately trained
with the source model as its base, is applied to filter the synthetic data used for fine-tuning the target
model’s LoRA adapter. For consistency and fair comparison, we use the same hyperparameter
settings for synthetic data generation in our experiments .
Comparison with TransLoRA. TransLoRA’s core assumption is to transfer entire synthetic se-
quences generated by the teacher. Therefore, its framework is tightly coupled to synthetic data and
is unable to function in the absence of teacher-generated labels. In that sense, this also implies that
TransLoRA cannot be applied to external datasets. Thus, it mainly highlights the role of synthetic
data, giving less thought to the architecture of the knowledge transfer procedure itself.
In contrast, T I T OK directly rethinks the mechanism of knowledge transfer itself. T I T OK concen-
trates on determining which tokens actually contain expert-specific knowledge (i.e., the tokens
where the expert significantly deviates from the basic model) rather than copying entire synthetic
sequences. Our novel token-level contrastive signal fundamentally changes how knowledge is ex-
tracted and aligned. Because this process does not rely on teacher-generated labels, T I T OK naturally
extends to external, non-synthetic datasets (See Table 4) and is therefore much more generalizable.
Therefore, despite the fact that the ultimate objective of both approaches is to solve the same
high-level LoRA transfer problem, which inevitably leads to certain overlapping components, the
underlying philosophies are essentially different. TransLoRA focuses on transferring full outputs
and relies entirely on synthetic data, whereas T I T OK focuses on transferring the expert’s internal
knowledge signals regardless of the data source, thus being more generalizable and effective.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 10: Comparison with a few-shot KD baseline using five seed prompts. BBH and MMLU
are reported as the average accuracy across tasks, while News Headline and Scholarly Title Gener-
ation tasks are evaluated using ROUGE-1 (R-1) and ROUGE-L (R-L). KD (5-shot) denotes knowl-
edge distillation performed with only five few-shot examples. Best scores are in bold.

    Transfer                  Method            BBH     MMLU     News Headline     Scholarly Title
                                                Acc.     Acc.     R-1    R-L        R-1     R-L
                              Vanilla           0.397   0.557    0.117    0.101    0.381    0.311
    Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B   KD (5-shot)       0.402   0.558    0.118    0.104    0.383    0.312
                              T I T OK (ours)   0.432   0.563    0.160    0.142    0.473    0.414
                              Vanilla           0.469   0.469    0.125    0.110    0.444    0.378
    Mistral 7B → Llama 8B     KD (5-shot)       0.470   0.477    0.126    0.111    0.446    0.379
                              T I T OK (ours)   0.482   0.488    0.140    0.124    0.464    0.403
                              Vanilla           0.469   0.469    0.125    0.110    0.444    0.378
    Llama3 3B → Llama3 8B     KD (5-shot)       0.470   0.479    0.126    0.111    0.446    0.379
                              T I T OK (ours)   0.509   0.475    0.127    0.113    0.457    0.392
                              Vanilla           0.469   0.469    0.125    0.110    0.444    0.378
    Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B     KD (5-shot)       0.470   0.477    0.126    0.111    0.446    0.380
                              T I T OK (ours)   0.510   0.479    0.140    0.122    0.461    0.404



E    C OMPARISON WITH A DDITIONAL BASELINE

Here, we introduce an additional baseline that leverages few-shot supervision. In practice, our
synthetic data generation process is seeded with a small set of prompts, which can be regarded
as few-shot data. To be thorough, we therefore establish a baseline trained only on these five
seed prompts, referred to as KD (5-shot), so that our evaluation of T I T OK also considers minimal
few-shot supervision. The results of this additional baseline are presented in Table 10.
Across all transfer settings, KD on only 5-shot samples provides only marginal improvements over
the vanilla model, with average gains of 0.9% on reasoning tasks (BBH and MMLU) and 0.6–1.2%
on personalization tasks (News Headline and Scholarly Title Generation). In contrast, T I T OK
delivers substantial improvements over this baseline, achieving 4.7% and 2.1% average gains on
reasoning tasks and 8.9–16.6% average gains on personalization tasks. Winning over KD with only
5 few-shot samples shows that T I T OK is not simply the result of a few-shot effect. Instead, the
five seed prompts act only as a starting point, which our framework expands into richer and more
effective synthetic training signals. This finding confirms that the true strength of T I T OK lies in
how it effectively leverages limited supervision rather than in the few-shot data itself.


F    E XTENDED TABLE 1 R ESULTS WITH VARIANCE AND S TATISTICAL D ETAIL

We additionally report the mean ± standard deviation over 3 random seeds of our results in Table
1. The results are presented in Table 11. As shown, the overall trend remains consistent: T I T OK
improves by 9.94% over the vanilla target model, 8.5% over KD, and 4.44% over TransLoRA. In
fact, these improvements remain substantially larger than the corresponding standard deviations


G    C OMPREHENSIVE K % S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

In this section, we conduct an extensive experiment on T I T OK’s performance throughout a wide
range of k values, from 10% to 90%. The results are comprehensively presented in Table 12. These
experiments demonstrate that T I T OK consistently outperforms the target vanilla baseline throughout
a broad, steady range of values, while the exact performance varies slightly depending on k%. This
clearly indicates that the method is not overly sensitive to the choice of k% and that there exists a
broad range of reasonable k% values where improvements are reliably obtained.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 11: Main results with variance. Mean ± standard deviation over three random seeds on
BBH, MMLU, News Headline, and Scholarly Title under four transfer settings. BBH and MMLU
are evaluated by exact-match accuracy, while News Headline and Scholarly Title are evaluated
by ROUGE-1/L. All evaluations are zero-shot. Best scores are in bold, while second highest are
underlined.

                                             BBH             MMLU                  News Headline                      Scholarly Title
 Transfer       Method
                                             Acc.              Acc.            R-1              R-L               R-1               R-L
                Vanilla                      0.397            0.557            0.117            0.101             0.381             0.311
  Mistral 7B    KD                       0.417 ± 0.007    0.560 ± 0.003    0.117 ± 0.004    0.104 ± 0.003     0.385 ± 0.006     0.310 ± 0.005
 → Mistral 7B   TransLoRA                0.416 ± 0.006    0.534 ± 0.001    0.156 ± 0.002    0.137 ± 0.001     0.447 ± 0.001     0.382 ± 0.001
                T I T OK (ours, k=70%)   0.424 ± 0.008    0.561 ± 0.002    0.161 ± 0.001    0.143 ± 0.001       0.473 ± 0       0.413 ± 0.001
                Vanilla                      0.469            0.469            0.125            0.110             0.444             0.378
  Mistral 7B    KD                       0.475 ± 0.004    0.482 ± 0.004      0.127 ± 0      0.112 ± 0.001     0.454 ± 0.001     0.387 ± 0.002
 → Llama3 8B    TransLoRA                0.473 ± 0.003    0.473 ± 0.001    0.126 ± 0.003    0.110 ± 0.002     0.461 ± 0.001     0.397 ± 0.001
                T I T OK (ours, k=70%)   0.484 ± 0.002    0.485 ± 0.003    0.139 ± 0.001    0.123 ± 0.001     0.464 ± 0.001     0.403 ± 0.001
                Vanilla                      0.469            0.469            0.125            0.110             0.444             0.378
  Llama3 3B     KD                       0.474 ± 0.005    0.477 ± 0.002    0.125 ± 0.001    0.110 ± 0.001     0.449 ± 0.001     0.383 ± 0.001
 → Llama3 8B    TransLoRA                0.471 ± 0.009    0.467 ± 0.002    0.122 ± 0.001    0.108 ± 0.001     0.454 ± 0.001     0.387 ± 0.001
                T I T OK (ours, k=30%)   0.496 ± 0.011    0.478 ± 0.004    0.127 ± 0.001    0.113 ± 0.001     0.456 ± 0.001       0.392 ± 0
                Vanilla                      0.469            0.469            0.125            0.110             0.444             0.378
  Llama2 7B     KD                       0.473 ± 0.002    0.476 ± 0.002      0.125 ± 0      0.110 ± 0.001     0.449 ± 0.001     0.382 ± 0.002
 → Llama3 8B    TransLoRA                0.472 ± 0.002    0.468 ± 0.002    0.123 ± 0.001    0.109 ± 0.001     0.457 ± 0.003     0.394 ± 0.005
                T I T OK (ours, k=70%)   0.488 ± 0.019    0.477 ± 0.003    0.138 ± 0.002    0.120 ± 0.002     0.461 ± 0.001     0.403 ± 0.001



Table 12: T I T OK performance across k = 10%–90%. “Vanilla” denotes performance of target
vanilla model. Highlighted columns denote the selected universal k% reported in Table 1. Highest
performance are in bold, while the second best results are underlined.

 Transfer                  Task              Metric      Vanilla   10%     20%       30%    40%       50%     60%       70%      80%      90%
                           BBH               Acc         0.397     0.401   0.420    0.444   0.445     0.441   0.432     0.432   0.431     0.431
                           MMLU              Acc         0.557     0.556   0.556    0.558   0.553     0.554   0.560     0.563   0.560     0.558
                                             R-1         0.117     0.153   0.159    0.161   0.161     0.160   0.160     0.160   0.160     0.161
 Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B   News Headline
                                             R-L         0.101     0.138   0.143    0.144   0.143     0.142   0.142     0.142   0.142     0.142
                                             R-1         0.381     0.466   0.475    0.481   0.474     0.473   0.473     0.473   0.473     0.470
                           Scholarly Title
                                             R-L         0.311     0.408   0.419    0.424   0.416     0.414   0.414     0.414   0.414     0.411
                           BBH               Acc         0.469     0.470   0.482    0.471   0.473     0.475   0.476     0.482   0.483     0.478
                           MMLU              Acc         0.469     0.487   0.483    0.500   0.492     0.492   0.488     0.488   0.494     0.500
                                             R-1         0.125     0.140   0.141    0.142   0.142     0.141   0.140     0.140   0.138     0.138
 Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B    News Headline
                                             R-L         0.110     0.123   0.124    0.125   0.126     0.124   0.123     0.124   0.122     0.121
                                             R-1         0.444     0.460   0.458    0.458   0.460     0.467   0.466     0.464   0.465     0.465
                           Scholarly Title
                                             R-L         0.378     0.398   0.394    0.395   0.396     0.406   0.405     0.403   0.403     0.406
                           BBH               Acc         0.469     0.515   0.507    0.509   0.512     0.500   0.492     0.505   0.518     0.509
                           MMLU              Acc         0.469     0.479   0.477    0.475   0.475     0.475   0.474     0.475   0.474     0.472
                                             R-1         0.125     0.127   0.127    0.127   0.128     0.122   0.121     0.122   0.121     0.121
 Llama3 3B → Llama3 8B     News Headline
                                             R-L         0.110     0.111   0.112    0.113   0.113     0.108   0.107     0.107   0.107     0.107
                                             R-1         0.444     0.449   0.456    0.457   0.460     0.462   0.462     0.461   0.462     0.462
                           Scholarly Title
                                             R-L         0.378     0.385   0.390    0.392   0.397     0.400   0.400     0.398   0.398     0.397
                           BBH               Acc         0.469     0.527   0.519    0.531   0.510     0.514   0.514     0.510   0.509     0.509
                           MMLU              Acc         0.469     0.475   0.474    0.477   0.481     0.477   0.482     0.479   0.477     0.479
                                             R-1         0.125     0.126   0.129    0.130   0.135     0.138   0.138     0.140   0.139     0.139
 Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B     News Headline
                                             R-L         0.110     0.110   0.114    0.115   0.119     0.121   0.120     0.122   0.121     0.121
                                             R-1         0.444     0.450   0.455    0.453   0.453     0.458   0.460     0.461   0.461     0.464
                           Scholarly Title
                                             R-L         0.378     0.385   0.391    0.389   0.389     0.396   0.402     0.404   0.404     0.406




The reason for choosing a universal k% hyperparameter in our study is to keep the presentation of
our paper more coherent and consistent. For this reason, we intentionally avoid task-specific tuning
and report the k% that generally works well across tasks. However, we note that with additional
per-task optimization of k%, further performance improvements are indeed possible.
With regard to the adaptive mechanism, each transfer setting exhibits its own effective k% range.
For instance, same-backbone BBH transfer favors a mid-range k% (30–70%), weak-to-strong BBH
transfer benefits from smaller k%, and weak-to-strong News Headline Generation shows the oppo-


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




site trend, preferring larger k%. Taken together, these trends suggest that a simple adaptive mecha-
nism can already be practical and effective. In our experiments, even coarse adjustments (i.e., using
around 30% for weak-to-strong reasoning transfers and 70% for weak-to-strong stylistic tasks as
denoted in Section 4.3) prove sufficient, without requiring extensive hyperparameter searches.


H      S YNTHETIC DATA G ENERATION WITH 2× P OOL AND T OP -M S ELECTION

In this section, we provide further details regarding the number of synthetic data samples used. In
generating synthetic data, we first provide five samples from the original training set as few-shot
exemplars to guide the model toward producing outputs in the desired style and format. For each
task, we initially create a synthetic pool containing twice the number of examples used in the
source model’s training. This pool is then filtered using token-wise contrastive excess scores, after
which we retain only the top M samples, where M equals the size of the source training set. To
be specific, we set M = 225 for BBH, M = 90 for MMLU, and M = 200 for LaMP tasks. This
procedure ensures that the target model’s LoRA adapter is trained on a dataset comparable in scale
to that of the source model, while selective filtering enhances the overall quality of the retained data.


I     ROUGE-L F ILTERING FOR D IVERSE S YNTHETIC Q UERIES

We now proceed to provide the task lists for which we did not apply ROUGE-L filtering when
generating diverse synthetic queries. In general, we use ROUGE-L filtering to encourage diversity
in queries, but for the tasks listed in Table 13, we only applied simple deduplication. In the case of
BBH, tasks such as boolean expressions or temporal sequences already follow highly restricted and
repetitive patterns, making high ROUGE-L scores inevitable. For MMLU, the only tasks without
ROUGE-L filtering are the history-related subjects. This is potentially because history questions
often require long passages that overlap in vocabulary, phrasing, or factual references (e.g., recurring
names, dates, or events). Thus, applying strict ROUGE-L filtering in such cases made it difficult to
generate the required number of synthetic queries. For all remaining BBH and MMLU tasks, as
well as all LaMP tasks, we applied a ROUGE-L threshold of 0.7 to encourage diversity while still
preserving task fidelity. Table 13 provides the tasks for which ROUGE-L filtering is not applied.
                            Table 13: Tasks without ROUGE-L filtering.

    Category               Tasks
    BBH                    boolean expressions, date understanding, disambiguation qa,
                           geometric shapes, logical deduction three objects,
                           multistep arithmetic two, navigate, object counting,
                           penguins in a table, reasoning about colored objects,
                           salient translation error detection, snarks, temporal sequences,
                           tracking shuffled objects three objects, web of lies
    MMLU                   high school world history, high school us history,
                           high school european history




J     ROBUSTNESS OF T I T OK TO S YNTHETIC DATA Q UALITY

While T I T OK’s primary contribution is token-level transfer and is thus not tied to synthetic data,
we provide a detailed analysis on the robustness of our method to synthetic data variations.
Robustness to low-quality synthetic data. First, we deliberately construct a suboptimal syn-
thetic dataset by selecting only the 250 lowest-scoring synthetic samples, as evaluated by the
GPT-4o-mini grading model and prompt in (scores ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}) (Chen et al., 2024a). All
training hyperparameters and filtering processes are identical to the original setup. As shown in
Table 14, T I T OK still substantially outperforms all baselines in the Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B BBH
transfer setting. This shows that T I T OK is still effective even with low-quality synthetic data.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                      Model Transfer               Method              BBH (Acc.)
                                                   Vanilla                0.397
                                                   KD                     0.406
                      Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B
                                                   TransLoRA              0.405
                                                   T I T OK (k=70%)       0.416

Table 14: BBH exact-match performance for the Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B transfer setting using
low-quality synthetic data. T I T OK (k=70%) continues to outperform all baselines.

                   Table 15: Alternative synthetic query prompt template for BBH.

    Synthetic query generation prompt for {task name} in BBH.

    Generate {task name} questions like these examples:
    Example 1:
    (few-shot example 1)
    Example 2:
    (few-shot example 2)
    Example 3:
    (few-shot example 3)
    Example 4:
    (few-shot example 4)
    Example 5:
    (few-shot example 5)

    Example 6:




Robustness to data diversity. Our synthetic data generation pipeline already incorporates dedu-
plication and a ROUGE-L diversity threshold. This ensures the exclusion of exact duplicates and
highly similar samples. More details are provided in Appendix I.
Robustness to prompt design. We further conduct an experiment with a different prompt for gen-
erating synthetic data. The alternative prompt template is provided in Table 15. We test this on BBH
tasks in the Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B and Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer settings.
Table 16 shows the results of using the alternative prompt for generating synthetic data. Analytically,
the results show that T I T OK achieves consistent improvements, and there are no substantial differ-
ences across prompt choices. This demonstrates that T I T OK is not sensitive to prompt formulation,
as long as the generated examples adhere to a reasonable and coherent structural pattern.
Overall, we emphasize that a highly refined or meticulously selected synthetic dataset is not required
for T I T OK. As long as the generated samples retain a relatively cohesive task structure, T I T OK is
still effective and is not very sensitive to the particular features of the synthetic data.


K      A DDRESSING S YNTHETIC DATA Q UALITY AND B IAS

We now move on to explain how our pipeline incorporates several components designed to reduce
bias and prevent quality degradation in synthetic data. Specifically, we achieve this by incorporating
several components, including a length filter that removes malformed or low-informative samples, a
token-wise contrastive excess mechanism that selects only the most informative tokens rather than
relying on the entire synthetic instances, and diversity filtering ( i.e., deduplication and ROUGE-L
thresholding) to prevent mode collapse during synthetic data generation.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 16: Effect of prompt variation on T I T OK on BBH in the Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B and Mistral
7B → Llama3 8B settings.

       Transfer                        Method                    Prompt                   BBH (Acc.)

                                       Vanilla                   –                          0.397
       Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B                                   original (Table 22)        0.432
                                       T I T OK (k=70%)
                                                                 alternative (Table 15)     0.436

                                       Vanilla                   –                          0.469
       Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B                                    original (Table 22)        0.482
                                       T I T OK (k=70%)
                                                                 alternative(Table 15)      0.485



                         Data Source                      BBH         Scholarly Title
                         Gold data                        2.40              3.68
                         Mistral 7B synthetic data        2.27              3.89
                         Llama3 3B synthetic data         2.01              3.74
                         Llama2 7B synthetic data         2.07              3.15

Table 17: Overall average quality ratings of gold and synthetic datasets across the BBH and Schol-
arly Title Generation tasks. GPT-4o-mini evaluates each data sample on a 1–5 scale.



Additionally, we further execute an external quality evaluation using a separate model
(GPT-4o-mini), adopting a robust synthetic data assessment methodology established in a prior
work (Chen et al., 2024a). Table 17 reports the average quality scores (scale 1–5) of gold data and
the synthetic data generated by multiple source models used in our experiments.
These results show that the synthetic data used in our experiments is comparable in quality to the
gold dataset, with no evidence of harmful bias dominating the data. Importantly, T I T OK performs
consistently well across all synthetic sources, even when the quality varies (e.g., 2.01 vs. 2.40 in
BBH), which further indicates that T I T OK does not rely on perfectly clean or unbiased synthetic
data. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that T I T OK is robust to imperfections in synthetic
data, and, once again, can be effectively used even in non-synthetic datasets as shown in Table 4.


L    E XPLORATION ON S ELF R EFINEMENT

While T I T OK primarily focuses on LoRA-to-LoRA knowledge transfer, we investigate its poten-
tial for self-refinement. We perform this experiment on BBH in the Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B and
the Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer settings. In particular, after the initial transfer step, 1) we
generate synthetic data using the target LoRA that had already learned T I T OK’s transferred knowl-
edge, 2) compute token-wise contrastive excess scores on the newly generated synthetic data using
the original source LoRA and the its base model, and 3) train a new target LoRA with the same
hyperparameters in the original setting (i.e., k=0.7). The results are summarized in Table 18.
Interestingly, the results show that the iterative step yields additional improvement, implying that
iterative refining is possible. We hypothesize that this is possible because the initial transfer increases
the target model’s familiarity with the task and partially aligns its internal representations with the
source domain. As a result, the target model generates cleaner, more coherent synthetic data with
fewer irrelevant patterns. This thereby enables the second iteration of T I T OK to more accurately
identify domain-informative tokens, which improves token selection and makes excess scoring more
discriminative. However, we emphasize that iterative refining synthetic data cannot surpass a target
model trained on real train data. By creating increasingly better synthetic data, iteration can help
narrow the gap, but it is still far from a fully supervised target model trained on actual data.


                                                     23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 18: “Initial T I T OK” indicates T I T OK applied once. “Iterative T I T OK: self transfer” applies
T I T OK again using synthetic data generated by the learned target LoRA after the initial transfer.

                                                                                  BBH (Acc.)

              Mistral 7B → Mistral 7B      Vanilla                                  0.397
                                           Initial T I T OK                         0.432
                                           Iterative T I T OK: self transfer        0.456
                                           Target expert                            0.460

              Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B       Vanilla                                  0.469
                                           Initial T I T OK                         0.482
                                           Iterative T I T OK: self transfer        0.510
                                           Target expert                            0.531


                                                                 BBH      Scholarly Title
                Model Transfer              Metric                Acc.     R-1       R-L
                                            source lora          0.460    0.429     0.363
                Llama3 3b → Llama3 8b       target base          0.462    0.444     0.378
                                            T I T OK (k=30%)     0.509    0.457     0.392
                                            source lora          0.359    0.431     0.367
                Llama2 7B → Llama3 8B       target base          0.469    0.444     0.378
                                            T I T OK (k=70%)     0.510    0.461     0.404

Table 19: Results on BBH and Scholarly Title Generation for transfer settings where the source
LoRA is weaker than the target baseline.


M     ROBUSTNESS OF T I T OK U NDER W EAKER S OURCE L O RA S
We now discuss scenarios where the source LoRA is weaker than the target model. While it is true
that T I T OK uses the source LoRA as a reference, its effectiveness is not strongly dependent on the
source LoRA’s absolute performance. To illustrate this point more clearly, Table 19 summarizes the
subsets of Table 1 in which the source LoRA underperforms the target model’s vanilla version, and
presents these source LoRA scores alongside the corresponding transfer results.
As shown in the table, T I T OK still consistently improves the target model even when the source
LoRA is weaker than the target baseline. This shows that T I T OK captures domain-specific signals
that are embedded in key tokens rather than inheriting the source LoRA’s full behavior.
KD-based approaches, however, are highly dependent on the absolute capacity of the source LoRA.
By making the target model follow the teacher’s logits, a weak or poorly tuned source LoRA un-
avoidably transfers certain flaws, resulting in the minimal gains supported by the results in the
above table. Meanwhile, T I T OK avoids these deficiencies because it fundamentally differs in how it
leverages the source LoRA. Instead of relying on the source LoRA’s logits globally, T I T OK uses the
source only to smartly identify informative token positions. As a result, a poorly tuned source LoRA
does not mislead T I T OK since it does not make the target model imitate the source LoRA’s behavior.
Rather, it selectively retrieves the useful tokens using the source LoRA’s domain knowledge.

N    C OMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD C OMPARISON
Here, we present the computational differences between T I T OK and TransLoRA. We conduct an
end-to-end time comparison of TransLoRA and T I T OK on the BBH and News Headline Generation
benchmarks in the Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer setting. The results are presented in Table
20 and 21. Across both benchmarks, T I T OK achieves roughly a 1.5×–2.5× reduction averagely in
total compute time. Most of the gain comes from the removal of discriminator training, while the
per-token log-likelihood computation produces only a minimal and manageable overhead.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                                                   BBH (250 data × 27 tasks)
Method      Metric                                   discriminator training          selecting data                  training   TOTAL
            avg total (sec/num task)                            279.33936                 31.72915                 104.61636 415.68487
TransLoRA
            avg sample (sec/sample)                               0.63251                  0.06346                   0.41847   1.11444
Method      Metric                      token-wise contrastive excess score selecting tokens (k 0.7) token align     training   TOTAL
            avg total (sec/num task)                            164.70895                  0.01155      0.41080 102.02867 267.15997
T I T OK
            avg sample (sec/sample)                               0.32942                  0.00005      0.00054   0.40811   0.73812


            Table 20: Runtime comparison for Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer on BBH.

                                            News Headline (200 data × 30 users)
Method      Metric                                    discriminator training           selecting data                training   TOTAL
            avg total (sec/num users)                            245.10085                 25.39730                58.71148 329.20963
TransLoRA
            avg sample (sec/sample)                                0.61279                  0.06358                 0.29356   0.96993
Method      Metric                      token-wise contrastive excess score selecting tokens (k 0.7) token align     training   TOTAL
            avg total (sec/num users)                             81.31437                  0.01863      0.89304 49.52768 131.75371
T I T OK
            avg sample (sec/sample)                                0.20355                  0.00005      0.00447 0.24764    0.45570


Table 21: Runtime comparison for Mistral 7B → Llama3 8B transfer on News Headline Generation.


O      Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
In this section, we provide qualitative examples from the News Headline Generation in the Mistral
7B → Mistral 7B transfer setting to illustrate how T I T OK identifies the most informative tokens.
The qualitative examples are presented in Figure 5. Analytically, the selected tokens correspond to
the beginnings of major semantic or structural units in the headline. These tokens carry the highest
information value: they denote transitions, introduce core noun phrase components, or contain root
words. Moreover, since the token-wise contrastive excess score is defined as the difference between
the expert model (source LoRA + base) and the amateur model (base only), it pinpoints the tokens
where the expert and amateur diverge most in their predictions and so include effective learning
signals for target tasks. Taken together, these qualitative examples effectively demonstrate that
T I T OK consistently retains the tokens that are most important for providing structure and meaning.

P     P ROMPTS FOR S YNTHETIC Q UERY G ENERATION
In this section, we present the prompts used for generating synthetic queries. Each prompt includes
five examples, which correspond to the seed prompts taken from the original data. For BBH, which
consists of multiple subtasks, we specify task-specific instructions and formatting rules so that the
generated queries and labels are structured according to the expected format. For example, Table 22
illustrates the case of boolean expressions as a representative example in detail.
In contrast, for MMLU, a single unified prompt format is sufficient for most subjects. The
exceptions are the history-related tasks, namely, high school us history, high school world history,
and high school european history. For these tasks, it is observed that more specific prompting is
required to obtain better generations. The general MMLU prompt is shown in Table 23, whereas
the history-related tasks make use of the specialized prompt provided in Table 24.
Finally, for LaMP tasks, we apply the same query template uniformly to each user. The detailed
prompt templates used for this benchmark are provided in Tables 25 and 26.




                                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




                   You are a news headline generator.

                   Generate a headline for the following article.
 Prompt
                   article: With a scalloped hem, it's a show-stopping piece that's both unique and affordable.
                            Want more? Be sure to check out Stylelist on….

                   headline:


 Output            Stylist': The Perfect White Dress For Your Wedding (PHOTOS) </s>



                   You are a news headline generator.

                   Generate a headline for the following article.
 Prompt
                   article: It’s hard to imagine that you would be interested in hearing about my favorite holiday tradition,
                           but if you are, I’d be happy to share…..

                   headline:



 Output            How To Make Your Own DIY Christmas Ornaments (PHOTOS) </s>


Figure 5: Qualitative examples from News Headline Generation in the Mistral 7B → Mistral
7B setting. Bold and highlighted tokens are part of the selected tokens. Notably, these tokens
exhibit high token-wise contrastive excess scores and thus fall into the top 70% selected for training.




                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 22: Synthetic query prompt for the BBH boolean expressions task. Each BBH subtask re-
quires task-specific instructions and formatting rules to ensure that generated queries and labels
follow the expected format. We show boolean expressions task here as a representative example.

  Synthetic query generation prompt for BBH (boolean expressions) task.
  System
  You are an expert task generator for boolean expressions tasks. Generate boolean expression
  evaluation tasks ending with ‘ is‘ – SINGLE LINE ONLY.

  CRITICAL FORMAT REQUIREMENTS:
  - Follow the EXACT format structure shown in the examples.
  - ABSOLUTELY CRITICAL: Generate ONLY ONE LINE, ONE TASK per response.
  - NO multiple lines, NO newlines (\n), NO multiple expressions.
  - Must end with ‘ is‘.
  - Example of INVALID output: True or False is\n\n False and True is
  - Example of VALID output: True or False or not False and ( True or
  False ) is

  Generate diverse content but maintain the exact same format structure. Only output the task
  input, not the solution.

  User
  Generate new boolean expressions tasks following these exact format examples:
  Example 1: [boolean expression ending with ‘ is‘]
  Example 2: [boolean expression ending with ‘ is‘]
  Example 3: [boolean expression ending with ‘ is‘]
  Example 4: [boolean expression ending with ‘ is‘]
  Example 5: [boolean expression ending with ‘ is‘]
  CRITICAL: Generate ONLY ONE LINE, exactly like the examples above.
  Generate a new task following the exact format:




                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 23: Synthetic query prompt for the MMLU. Applied to all tasks except for history related
tasks.


  Synthetic query generation prompt for MMLU (general).
  Example 1:
  Question: [question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 2:
  Question: [question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 3:
  Question: [question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 4:
  Question: [question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 5:
  Question: [question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 6:




                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




Table 24: Synthetic query prompt for the MMLU history tasks only. The history tasks are
high school us history, high school world history, and high school european history. These his-
tory tasks required more specific prompting to obtain better results.


  Synthetic query generation prompt for MMLU (history related tasks).
  Generate [SUBJECT] multiple choice questions following these examples:
  Example 1:
  Question: [history question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 2:
  Question: [history question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 3:
  Question: [history question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 4:
  Question: [history question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Example 5:
  Question: [history question snippet]
  1. [choice snippet]
  2. [choice snippet]
  3. [choice snippet]
  4. [choice snippet]
  Answer: [1–4]

  Now generate a new [SUBJECT] question following the same format:
  Question:




                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026




            Table 25: Synthetic query prompt for the News Headline Generation task.

  Synthetic query generation prompt for News Headline Generation
  You are a news text generator. Generate diverse news article texts that could be used to create
  headlines. Only output the raw news text content, not headlines or queries.

  Example 1: [article snippet]
  Example 2: [article snippet]
  Example 3: [article snippet]
  Example 4: [article snippet]
  Example 5: [article snippet]

  Example 6:




            Table 26: Synthetic query prompt for the Scholarly Title Generation task.


  Synthetic query generation prompt for Scholarly Title Generation
  You are a scholarly abstract generator. Generate diverse ONE paragraph abstracts that ask for
  creating paper titles from abstracts. The abstract should be ONE paragraph only. Only output
  the raw abstract text, not the actual titles.

  Example 1: Create a title for this research paper:
  Abstract: ”[abstract snippet]”
  Title: ”[title]”
  Example 2: Create a title for this research paper:
  Abstract: ”[abstract snippet]”
  Title: ”[title]”
  Example 3: Create a title for this research paper:
  Abstract: ”[abstract snippet]”
  Title: ”[title]”
  Example 4: Create a title for this research paper:
  Abstract: ”[abstract snippet]”
  Title: ”[title]”
  Example 5: Create a title for this research paper:
  Abstract: ”[abstract snippet]”
  Title: ”[title]”

  Write a research paper abstract as a single paragraph containing at least 3 sentences.

  Example 6:




                                                 30
